asked
the Minister for National Development whether he can provide an update on the plans to assist the elderly and physically challenged who require direct lift access but whose HDB blocks are deemed unsuitable for the Lift Upgrading Programme on the grounds of economic and/or technical viability.
2
asked
the Minister for National Development (a) what are the measures to help residents who do not benefit from the Lift Upgrading Programme (LUP) or who do not have a lift on their floor; (b) how many of such units have approached HDB for assistance to allow them to purchase another unit or move into new flats for lift access; (c) whether the Ministry provides special consideration for such cases as many may need lifts for mobility reasons and in their old age have difficulty getting new loans from HDB or have already taken two concessionary loans; (d) how many residential units are currently still not able to benefit from having a lift on their floor as the block does not qualify for LUP; and (e) what proportion of these units is due to technical infeasibility and what proportion is due to insufficient units to meet the maximum share cap for the project.
3
asked
the Minister for National Development (a) what is the outcome of the trial involving two new lift solutions to provide direct lift access to flats not eligible for the Lift Upgrading Programme (LUP); and (b) whether HDB has found the lift solutions suitable to be implemented for flats not eligible for LUP.
: Mdm Speaker, may I have your permission to take Question Nos 1 to 3 together?
:
Yes, please.
: Thank you. While we try to offer the Lift Upgrading Programme (LUP) to as many HDB blocks as possible, there are some blocks where the LUP is not feasible due to technical constraints or prohibitively high cost. Through the adoption of new technologies and innovative solutions, HDB has reduced the number of such blocks to about 200. We continue to explore ways so that even more households can benefit.
For example, HDB is piloting two new solutions - the Pneumatic Vacuum Elevator (PVE) and the Vertical Platform Lift (VPL). The PVE has been turned on for public trial last month, while the VPL is currently being evaluated. HDB is testing the new lift solutions to ensure that they are safe and technically reliable before rolling them out. Surveys will also be conducted to gather feedback from users of the PVE and VPL, and the results will help us determine if they are suitable for wider implementation.
Residents who wish to move to a unit with direct lift access can sell their existing flat and either buy a resale flat or a new subsidised flat if they meet eligibility conditions. Meanwhile, Singaporean residents who are in urgent need of direct lift access due to medical conditions or disability may approach HDB for housing and financing assistance. HDB assesses each request on a case-by-case basis to see how best we can render help.
: I thank the Senior Minister of State for his reply to my Parliamentary Question (PQ). In my experience so far, as the Senior Minister of State had mentioned, HDB does look at each case on a case-by-case basis. The experience of some of these residents is that they want to move out but they cannot; and even through appeals, they cannot get through because most of them are immobile and aged. Therefore, if they want to buy a better flat, it is very difficult to get a loan. Sometimes, they have already taken two concessionary loans. And if they want to downgrade, they seem to have a lot of difficulties in doing so. Many of them have not been successful in such appeals, although the Senior Minister of State mentioned that HDB does look at these on an individual basis. Will the HDB consider giving even more special consideration for such families, especially those who are aged and hardly mobile.
Second question is this: specifically to the number of LUP flats, there are about 200 left, as I understand it. HDB has done about 98% of flats through the LUP; there are just 2% of flats left. Many residents I meet ask, "There is just 2% left. Why does HDB not consider removing that cap? There are many flats out there that are technically feasible for LUP, but just that they cannot meet the cost cap." Given that there are just so few left, why does HDB not consider removing the cost cap?
One more question – I am glad to hear that the pilot trials are underway. The question would be would the pilots resolve the cost cap issues, and what is the likelihood?
: Mdm Speaker, I thank the Member for his supplementary questions. Our assistance rendered to households facing medical conditions and mobility issues is very targeted and specific. So, I would encourage the Member to refer those cases to us to look and see how best we can help them. If they are willing to be open to flats with lift access in other locations, I am sure we can find alternatives for them.
The 200 blocks or so that are left in the LUP that cannot be done up, as I have said, it is either because of cost reasons or because of technical constraints. For cost reasons, the range is very wide. It can be as high as $200,000 per benefiting unit. In cases like these, if you build a conventional new lift, it serves only two or maybe four units. So, the cost is very high. We have to consider whether that is the best use of our resources. For $200,000, you can build a brand new 3-room flat. And also, if the residents were to have a share, the burden on the residents will also be very high.
As for our pilot trials, the vacuum and platform lifts are low-cost alternatives. The vacuum lift is one that works on differential air pressure. But such lifts will have limitations in terms of how tall a building they can serve. Typically, it is a two- to three-storey building. For flats that have such problems – low-rise flats, very few benefiting units – technically, if the space and so on can accommodate, this might be the solution. We are doing the trial now. We have to see how the public will respond to the trial. The downside, though, is that it is smaller and much slower, about one-fifth or one-quarter of the speed of a normal lift. People who use it would be wheelchair users who really need the access and do not have other alternatives.
All in, we will continue to look for possible solutions, including what the Member has suggested, and try to reduce the number as best as we can.
:
I thank the Senior Minister of State for the reply. May I know if there is a timeframe for these trials to be completed, and how soon can it be that a conclusion can be made, so that it can be rolled out to units that can possibly implement them?
: The two trials that we talk about, one has been installed in a commercial building. I think it is about three-storey high. The other one – the platform lift – has been installed in a car park complex, which is also a three-storey high building. The first one is already open to trial; we just started. A fair amount of trial period would be at least six months to gauge the response. The longer we have it, the more we can also ascertain its reliability because it all depends on the traffic and how people use it, and whether they can live up to the manufacturers' promise. The other platform lift is still under trial, to be commissioned soon.
So, I think a reasonable period of six months to a year would be good, before we roll out to more estates for implementation.
: Thank you, Mdm Speaker. I would like to ask the Senior Minister of State about the trials. We are trying to solve the issue of very few benefiting units, which cannot afford the cost, but why do we have these trials in commercial buildings or car parks where they are public areas and probably experience heavier usage? So, my question is whether the assessment would be equitable in an HDB housing setting?
The second question is, I hear that the cost would be something that will be more favourable. May I know with these two new systems, what is the minimum number of benefiting units that can justify the cost?
The last question is, among the 200 blocks in Singapore which do not LUP, do they include blocks where most parts of the units have lifts but due to segmentation, some units are not benefiting from those? I have a few in my area. Will these units be eligible and considered for this new LUP if these trials are successful?
: With regard to the last question, the 200-over blocks include those that are partially served by lifts to every floor now. Because of the block configuration and the way that they are designed – different heights and so on – certain parts of the block are just not possible to have lift access, whereas a good part of the block already has lift access to every floor.
As for the trials, based on our estimation, we can extend to a few dozen of such low-rise blocks. They are all spread out nationwide. The various Members would know where they are. But, we are still gathering experience. One of the reasons why we do it in a commercial area, is because the usage is higher than residential. It would help us collect data faster, in terms of heavier frequency of use.
:
I have two such low-rise blocks. I would like to offer them for the trial. I hope this will be a real test of a real low-rise block. There are many of these throughout the island, and I think adding on to the two that you have in the commercial block and the car park, I offer my two low-rise blocks for consideration.
: Mdm Speaker, I have heard the suggestion and I have taken note of it.
:
Just a point of clarification. In the Senior Minister of State's replies, he has always mentioned low-rise blocks. The Member Baey Yam Keng asked about high-rise segmented flats because out of the 200 flats that do not qualify for LUP, I have got 32 of such blocks in my estate. That is about 15% of the total national quota in one division. In that sense, I wish to clarify that the new solutions will also apply to these high-rise segmented blocks, as well. And if so, I would also be happy to do some trials.
:
Mdm Speaker, I have taken note that the Member has a significant share of the 200 blocks. It is true. Besides low-rise blocks, there are other blocks that are what HDB would describe as type D blocks. They have very unique configurations and some of these blocks have lift access to every floor, except to 3rd, 6th, 9th, 12 levels, because of the common corridor that runs through the entire floor. I think the Member has such blocks in his division. It is not possible to build a lift that punches through existing common corridor.
The two trials that we talk about are meant for low-rise blocks. We have to look for other kinds of solutions that will bring the lift service all the way to the 12th floor. So far, Members may recall that initially, we had 1,000 blocks that were found to be difficult to have lift access. But through a combination of solutions, we managed to reduce them to about 200.
What are these solutions? Some of them are, for instance, lifts that do not use a lot of headroom. So, we can bring the lift all the way to the 12th floor because that is the maximum it can go. Otherwise, you will sacrifice the top floor – they will go without lifts. The other solution is a bubble lift – in some of the Members' areas, there are bubble lifts. These lifts do away with lift shafts, reducing the need to have strong foundational work required to support the lift shafts. The other solution would be building a long bridge to the lift shafts. In other words, you cannot bring the lift shaft so close to the building; instead, you have to extend it out because the buildings have got uneven vertical facades. So, the solution was to build outwards and build excess. We have to continue to explore such solutions. LUP has covered 98% of fats, as the Member has noticed. As in many things, the last 2% will be very challenging, very costly, and also technically difficult. We will see how best we can continue to find solutions for this 2%.
:
My question is: I believe out of this 2%, it could be that for some units, the cost could be slightly higher than those eligible under LUP. For that kind of scenario, will the Ministry consider still going ahead to offer to the residents, for them to put a vote to it, for them to consider if they still want it if they were to pay slightly higher. They can look at the amount to see how much higher they have to pay. I do get this feedback on my house visits, where residents say, "Show us the cost. It is for us to decide." Will the Ministry consider that?
: Mdm Speaker, I have heard Mr Gan's suggestion. We will take this into consideration.
asked
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs whether the Ministry will consider allowing HDB flat or private apartment owners to have the flexibility of not allowing their rental tenants to use their home address on their NRICs so as to minimise the possibility of harassment as a result of legal or illegal money lending activities.
5
asked
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs (a) in the last three years, what is the number of cases of identity card holders who contravene the National Registration Act of not updating their residential addresses within 28 days; and (b) what can the Ministry do to increase enforcement, awareness and compliance to curb abuses.
:
Mdm Speaker, may I have your permission to take Question Nos 4 and 5 together?
:
Yes, please.
: Thank you. Madam, the National Registration Act requires NRIC holders to report any change in their place of residence to the Immigration and Checkpoints Authority (ICA) or Police within 28 days of the change. Any change will also be reflected on their NRICs. This applies to both property owners and rental tenants. Failure to do so is an offence and punishable by a fine or imprisonment, or both. Over the past three years, 61 persons were convicted for failure to report a change of their place of residence, an offence typically committed in furtherance of other criminal offences.
Updated address records are necessary for Government agencies to get in touch with individuals for various purposes, including the registration of voters by the Elections Department, and contact tracing in a disease outbreak situation. This applies to owners as well as rental tenants.
Similarly, owners or rental tenants should use their current address for commercial transactions, including obtaining a credit facility. A person who uses an outdated rental address when he is no longer staying at the location will not be traceable and will cause inconvenience to current residents of that address. If a tenant dishonestly uses an outdated address to secure a licensed loan, he can be punishable under the Penal Code. Police will also act firmly against borrowers who obtain unlicensed loans with their outdated addresses. Under section 28C of the Moneylenders Act, such borrowers may face imprisonment for up to a year.
To ensure that the change of address facility is not abused, including for criminal purposes, ICA requires the NRIC holder to show documentary proof that he is residing in the property before effecting the change.
ICA works with HDB to inform property owners during property sale transactions of the need for timely update of address. This legal requirement is also made known on ICA's and HDB's web sites and disseminated through ICA's numerous outreach exhibitions.
Individuals who believe that their address has been wrongfully used should lodge a report with ICA or the Police so that the authorities can investigate the matter.
:
I thank the Minister for the reply. Would the Ministry consider allowing rental tenants the option to use maybe post office box addresses or their next-of-kin's home address with prior agreement on their NRIC instead?
:
Madam, I thank the Member for her question and I appreciate the intent behind her question. But as I have stated, the address on the NRIC, as reflected in the records, serves very important purposes, whether it is in terms of enforcement or contact tracing and for a variety of other reasons. So, we need addresses that are current and that allow our enforcement agencies and other agencies to take appropriate steps, especially when there are specific exigencies. So, a P.O. Box address or an NOK address does not really serve that purpose. And, therefore, I think it would be something quite difficult for us to consider, based on our current provisions and laws.
To ask
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs (a) how many times have the police exercised its "move-on powers" since they have been entrusted with such powers through the Public Order Act; (b) whether these powers have enabled the police to diffuse potentially violent situations and maintain order; and (c) if so, whether examples of such situations can be provided.
:
Question No 6, Madam.
(for the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs)
: Mdm Speaker, move-on orders have proven to be a useful means for the Police to pre-emptively de-escalate potential public order situations and stop unauthorised activities that could cause public alarm or disorder in public places. By issuing the move-on orders, Police were able to stop potential illegal actions and disperse those involved without the need to effect arrests.
Before move-on orders were introduced, Police could either warn an offender and follow-up with post-event investigations in the case of a non-arrestable offence, or arrest an offender on the spot in the case of an arrestable offence. The first option presented limited scope for officers to prevent incidents from escalating, while the latter option limited the flexibility of Police action in cases where the offender did not pose a substantial threat and was, in fact, amenable to counsel.
Since the Public Order Act was enacted in 2009, 20 move-on orders have been issued by the Police. Nineteen subjects of the orders complied and no further adverse incident took place. The remaining subject failed to comply with the order and was subsequently arrested.
asked
the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth (a) given the success of the recent South East Asian Games, how will the Ministry ensure that there is a lasting legacy; and (b) what will the Ministry do to ride on the momentum.
: Madam, the recently-concluded SEA Games was a sporting milestone for Singapore. Indeed, we must build on its success, which was a great example of how, by working together as one Team Singapore, we can excel and do our nation proud.
Our Team Singapore athletes put up their best ever performance at the SEA Games. This shows that our High Performance Sports system is on the right track. We will do an after-action review and apply the lessons learnt to further strengthen the system, so that more of our athletes can go on to excel in future SEA Games and on a bigger stage – the Asian Games, Commonwealth Games, as well as the Olympics.
First, we will continue to find ways to improve the training and development of our athletes, for example, by strengthening our partnerships with the National Sports Associations (NSAs) to improve their quality of coaching, to work out individual athlete development plans and high performance programmes. We will also strengthen the support offered by the Singapore Sports Institute to national athletes, for example, by enhancing the sports science and sports analytics support to them.
Second, we will improve youth athlete development, so that more promising student-athletes will have the opportunity to excel in their sports and don national colours, while continuing their education. The review of the Singapore Sports School, which is now underway, will provide for this.
Third, we will build on the support of employers, so that national athletes who have to juggle sports and work can get the support they need to train and compete for Singapore.
There was strong community interest in the SEA Games. More than half a million people attended the various sporting events and activities. And there are currently over 60 million views of the broadcasts of the various events on the SEA Games
YouTube
channel.
Through the packed venues at every sporting event, we could clearly see that there can be great demand from Singaporeans to catch sporting action "live" in our stadiums and arenas. So, we will build on this interest by making our sports calendar more vibrant – providing Singaporeans a wider choice and an array of sporting events to attend, be it the upcoming FINA World Junior Championships in August, the Women's Tennis Association Finals in October, or the Netball Nations Cup in December. Our goal is to promote a culture of attending sporting events with friends and family, so that, in the process, inspire Singaporeans to engage in sports themselves, whether at the recreational, competitive or even the high performance levels.
We will also continue to grow the ActiveSG movement. It currently has 815,000 members, and we will provide more opportunities for Singaporeans to adopt an active lifestyle.
The most heartening aspect of the Games for me was the strong demonstration of the Singapore Spirit throughout the Games. Our many volunteers worked hard, day and night, to put together a great experience for Singaporeans and visitors from the region. So, we will strengthen sports volunteerism as one of the legacies of the SEA Games.
There were many instances where the Singapore Spirit shone bright – with spectators singing the National Anthem with gusto; great sportsmanship exhibited by our athletes; and people who stayed back to help clean the venues after events.
These instances clearly demonstrated the Singapore Spirit – of unity, resilience and pride in our nation. So, we will continue to nurture and grow the Singapore Spirit in all of us, so that we can continue to stay united as a people, and strong as a nation.
In the coming months, as we celebrate our Golden Jubilee, there will be more opportunities for sports to rally the nation. The ASEAN Para Games in December is one such an opportunity and I look forward to seeing Singaporeans come together again, this time in support of our Team Singapore para athletes, in the same way that they turned up to cheer for Team Singapore at the SEA Games.
asked
the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth (a) since the launch of ActiveSG, how many Singaporeans and permanent residents have signed up for membership; (b) whether these numbers have met the Ministry's targets; and (c) if not, what plans does the Ministry have to boost utilisation of ActiveSG credits.
: Madam, we launched ActiveSG as the national movement for sports in April last year. Since then, 815,000 persons have signed up, of which close to 90% are Singapore citizens, the rest being Permanent Residents. About three in five ActiveSG members have utilised their free ActiveSG credits to book a sports facility or to sign up for a sports programme.
The encouraging response has far exceeded our expectations for the first year. To encourage more Singaporeans to sign up for ActiveSG, and to use their ActiveSG credits, we will expand the range of ActiveSG programmes to offer more quality opportunities for sports participation.
ActiveSG will work with schools to provide additional opportunities for students to participate in sports, whether it is to pick up a new sport, go further in a sport they are already participating in, or to take part in a sports competition or league.
One example is the Basketball Developmental League for school teams that did not qualify for the National Round of the B Division Inter-School Basketball Championships. So, these are students interested in playing basketball but they did not qualify for the B Division Inter-School Championships. Each team was allowed to field more players than usual, so that those who did not make it to the school team can get a chance to compete. ActiveSG also recently ran a camp for youth sports leaders, so that they can give back to the community by developing sports programmes for others.
We are also working with companies. So, building on the successful partnership with Comfort Delgro to encourage taxi drivers to participate in sports, ActiveSG will now engage other corporate partners to design sports programmes for their employees.
Overall, we want to ride on the momentum of a successful SEA Games, as I had mentioned earlier just now in my reply, and ActiveSG will aim to increase its outreach and offerings, so that more Singaporeans can live better through sports.
: I thank the Minister for the response. ActiveSG has received a very good response from all Singaporeans and that is the main reason why I tabled this question. Two supplementary questions.
The first is that many Singaporeans who are in the programme would like to know how long this programme would be continued and whether there are any parameters for determining what is the period that this programme will run, whether there will be a limit to it, and if there are any parameters which will determine this.
The second is that there is some feedback about how we can best expand the use of ActiveSG. There have been calls to allow the use of these credits, for example, to participate in so-called privately organised events, such as marathons and cycling events and so on. There have also been some calls, for example, to allow the use of credits for people to spectate at sports events, for example, at the recently-concluded SEA Games. So, I was wondering whether the Ministry would consider thinking about some other avenues in which ActiveSG credits can be used.
: Madam, on the first question on the duration of the programme, there are two different parts.
One, ActiveSG itself will continue forever. It is not a programme. ActiveSG is really meant as a national movement in the way we want to excite, mobilise and provide opportunities for people to participate in sports. So, it is core to what we are doing in the Ministry and in Sports Singapore.
I believe the Member is talking about the credits, whether there is a time expiration to the credit, and the answer is no. We will let people take their time to use their credits.
As to the usage of the credits, whether it can be broadened to a wider range of activities, my sense is that I would not want to use the credits just to watch sports events because that was not the purpose of the credits. The purpose of the credits was to encourage people to take part in sports and that is why we have allowed the credits to be used specifically for SportSG facilities in our sports centres as well as programmes within the centres. We can consider whether or not this can be expanded to a broader range of activities, but our main intention is to get people to want to participate in sports.
asked the Minister for Social and Family Development (a) how will the Smart Nation project benefit persons with disabilities; and (b) whether there will be initiatives that build assistive technology capabilities within the social service sector and increase access of persons with disabilities to technology and assistive technology devices.
: Mdm Speaker, technology can be a very important enabler for persons with disabilities. As Singapore strives to become a Smart Nation, persons with disabilities would be able to benefit from a broad range of initiatives. In addition, the Government will have specific initiatives on infocomm and assistive technology to help persons with disabilities make use of suitable technology devices and solutions in their daily living, education, employment and interactions with others and in whatever areas that we think that we could apply those technologies in.
Some of these are already in the works. For example, from August this year, MSF will increase the lifetime cap and subsidy coverage of its Assistive Technology Fund. The changes will help more persons with disabilities and provide them greater support to defray the cost of purchasing or repairing their assistive devices. In education, for example, MOE already supports students with special needs in both mainstream and Special Education (SPED) schools through funding assistive technology devices and support services. Students studying in Institutes of Higher Learning can now tap on the Special Education Needs Fund to purchase devices to support their learning.
Besides individuals, we are also reaching out to Voluntary Welfare Organisations (VWOs) that serve persons with disabilities. VWOs can tap on grants to use infocomm and assistive technology in their programmes, for example, to improve communication and socialisation skills of their clients. SPED schools can also tap on a fund to upgrade their IT infrastructure and develop innovative projects.
To generate new solutions for persons with disabilities, a $30 million Tote Board-Enabling Lives Initiative Grant was launched in 2014 and administered by SG Enable, the grant scheme supports new ideas and innovative pilots that address cross-cutting issues on disability, including more effective use of data and technology. A grant call was made early this year to seek out ideas and solutions on using technology to improve the lives of persons with disabilities from both the private and VWO sectors. The results should be known in about a month's time.
I thank the Minister for the clarification and we want to thank the Government for the ATF as well as the other initiatives that have been made available to persons with disabilities. My question relates greatly more to where persons with disabilities come in, in the Smart Nation initiatives.
We do understand that, that is in the course of being built, but do persons with disabilities play a role? And specifically, Minister, if you could share with us the road map towards including persons with disabilities within this larger Smart Nation initiative – what the strategies are to empower, enable and to facilitate persons with disabilities to be able to live independently, work independently? What initiatives will there be to increase or build on the capability within the sector, the AT assessors, the occupational therapists, for example. Minister, if you could clarify.
: Mdm Speaker, as we embark on the Smart Nation effort, we find that there are many applications across society. It is important for all the different stakeholders to participate in whatever capacities that they can and to offer ideas and initiatives, and also to push Government to explore those new areas. At the same time, it is also about the partnership between Government and the commercial sectors. There are also companies who are also innovative and thinking about ways to apply this.
Some of the things that we are doing, for example, the SPD Assistive Technology Centre provides consultation, assessment, loan, training and the use of AT devices. In addition, the InfoComm Accessibility Centre (IAC) was set up at SPD's premises through a people-public-private partnership supported by IDA, MSF, NCSS, Tote Board and Microsoft Singapore. The IAC encourages the use of technology through IT training to bridge the digital divide for persons with disabilities. SG Enable will play a very important part in working with partners. That is really quite key, to bring on board the private sector, many of whom have technologies which are being used for commercial applications, but you could see how they could also be adapted to help persons with disabilities as well.
They are working with partners to improve the provision and adoption of infocomm and assistive technology among persons with disabilities. So, as we look to integrate technology into our daily lives under this push, new ideas and innovations will continue and I think we need to bring them on board. That is where we will be keen to listen to new ideas, possible technological innovations and collaborations that can lead to improvement in the lives of all Singaporeans and also for Singaporeans with disabilities.
This is an on-going effort and I do encourage all the different stakeholders to play a part to help shape that space. The way in which technology is transforming is quite significant, so we need to make sure that we harness it, not just at the individual level but at the systemic level as well. Let us explore how best we could apply.
: I thank the Minister. I do recognise that there are initiatives within the sector and I do speak as someone from SPD as well as SG Enable, and here I declare my interest. But it is also because of where we are right now that we feel that the reach for assistive technology to persons with disabilities is not sufficient. It cannot be the work just of VWOs, however many VWOs collaborate. It has got to be a national effort.
Hence, Minister, my question is again, how we fit all these efforts within the national initiative so that it does not become a stand-alone project, but it is a continuum of our phasing of persons within the community, truly, truly whole-of-government approach, Minister. I am looking forward to your sharing of more concrete plans as well as a more definite timeline for us to work on, so that we know how to prepare ourselves.
: Mdm Speaker, there are discreet efforts in terms of focusing on specific areas of needs. But you will realise that in the effort, for example, in transforming the way we lay out our city, it also incorporates how technology is being brought on board to help persons with disabilities. I would suggest that some of these areas also would straddle our other areas of concern, for example, with the way our demographics are revolving a lot more elderly in our society. In terms of mobility, for example, that is something that we are looking at in terms of how do you provide for better tracking of needs. These technology applications would also apply for persons with disabilities.
If you are asking for whether there is a specific dedicated road map for persons with disabilities, that is something that we can take up, if that provides a level of assurance. I would say that, that is an area that we are looking at, if it helps to pull it altogether and present it as a one whole, that is something that we can do so that it will give the stakeholders in the sector better clarity of how it pulls together and also whether as a result of pulling it together, could we further enhance it?
Rest assured that we are to making sure that Singapore is an inclusive society and that includes Singaporeans of varying abilities. The way in which we want to apply at technology to the way we evolve as a city – not just physically, but also in terms of the soft aspect – technology has a very big part to play. Really, it is about applying it in ways in which as many, if not all, Singaporeans can benefit, including persons with disabilities.
: I thank the Minister for the assurance that he will put aside some resources to support some of these discrete programmes that are happening in the special needs sector. Singapore is one of the most wired nations and much needs to be done in order that this community would not be left behind in information technology.
In view of the urgency of the matter, since almost every child in Singapore has access to IT, I would like to ask the Minister when the timeframe would be for the Ministry to set aside resources and perhaps even set up a small taskforce comprising the different players so that, what Ms Chia Yong Yong mentioned about the inclusion of disability community in the Smart Nation master plan could be effected? When could that be?
:
Mdm Speaker, Ms Denise Phua likes to ask for specific timelines. This is something that I would follow up on and I will get back to her.
: It is very heartening to hear that we have a Smart Nation plan that does want to be inclusive and bring in also the interest of the marginalised. I am also wondering, on the same note, whether it is possible to include the marginalised, our disabled community, upstream. In other words, at the planning and gathering of inputs stage, but also to get some of them who are quite able despite their physical or other disabilities, to be part of the planning and designing team.
The second area is, as Minister mentioned about the barrier-free access efforts made by the various agencies. Quite often, I have encountered circumstances and feedback from the disabled community that many of these barrier-free access amenities, no doubt were planned with good intentions, but when put together, may not actually work for the disabled.
For example, the visually impaired has given feedback that, although you have tactiles on the ground at the MRT station, they do not know where the tactiles are leading to the toilet or leading to another bus station. Or for the wheelchair-bound, very often, when they come down a slope, it meets all the barrier-free access specifications but it ends up with the pillar right in front, and issues like these.
So, whether it is possible to involve them, either upstream or even downstream where they could then be also trained as barrier-free access auditors or other such fields, especially when universal designs are concerned.
: Mdm Speaker, I would like to thank the Member for her points raised. I would not use the term "marginalised" to describe them. I would say that they are Singaporeans with different abilities and I think it is important for us to include them.
I would suggest that many of them are involved in the consultation process, in terms of designing, certainly, in my time in MND, and looking at how MND works with different stakeholders, in terms of shaping our respective spaces.
We would very much appreciate the various feedback. Feedback has always been provided, where there are inadequacies or where it was less than ideal. But the Member would agree with me that things have moved on in a significant ways.
I would not deny that there will always be teething issues along the way, whether in terms of the physical infrastructure or the way perhaps technology is applied. It cannot be applied for its own sake. So, the point the Member is making is an important one which is, ultimately, the outcome must be something that is useful for those who are involved.
And so, upstream involvement, that is something that is on-going, but I think we can look at whether they could be extended or to what degree and to make sure that at least the key stakeholders are there, whether in consultation or as part of the team to shape some of these respective spaces. So, that is a fair point and we will make sure that that is something that is done.
: While we are on the topic of Smart Nation, the current EM refers to the setting up of the National Technology Centre. How is that coming along and how would that fit into Smart Nation initiative?
:
Mdm Speaker, I would be quite happy to provide an update if Member could submit a separate PQ. We can follow up on that.
asked
the Minister for Social and Family Development (a) what is the number of problem gambling cases recorded by the National Council on Problem Gambling in the last three years; (b) what kind of counselling sessions are utilised to help these problem gamblers break out of the vicious cycle of gambling; and (c) what role do family members and the community play as points of support to help these individuals overcome their gambling problem.
: Mdm Speaker, problem gamblers and families who face such issues can seek help at two key service points – primarily the Thye Hua Kwan Problem Gambling Recovery Centre and the National Addictions Management Service (NAMS) which is located at the Institute of Mental Health (IMH). The former treats the less serious cases, while NAMS also treats the more severe pathological gamblers. In addition, there are other private and non-funded community and religious organisations that offer similar services as well.
Between 2012 and 2014, Thye Hua Kwan and NAMS saw a combined 2,700 cases. This is about 60% more, in absolute numbers, 1,000 cases more than that between 2009 and 2011. We have looked at the increase and it is, primarily, due to greater public education efforts, which we have stepped up significantly which have raised awareness on problem gambling and encouraged help-seeking behaviour. It is important for people to step forward both as individuals, and for their families and loved ones to step forward to highlight those issues. We are encouraged that people are coming forward.
The treatment plan for each problem gambler varies; it really depends on the severity of addiction. It usually involves a combination of counselling and different types of therapy, conducted on an individual or group basis. Psychiatric services may be extended for the more severe pathological gamblers. Financial and legal counselling services, where necessary, are also extended to help the problem gambler and his family cope. Recovering patients are encouraged to join support groups for longer term support.
Tackling the complex issue of problem gambling requires the combined efforts of personal responsibility, family involvement, community involvement and, certainly, Government support. The family is often in the best position to detect signs of problem gambling in their loved ones, encourage them to seek help, and also support them during treatment. Studies have shown that treatment works best if the problem gambler is accompanied by family members. The community also plays an important part in helping affected families access relevant information, resources and services. For example, more Family Service Centres have stepped up efforts to train their counsellors and social workers to provide the first line of counselling and assistance when families present problem gambling issues.
asked
the Prime Minister how will the default by Greece on its debt owed to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) impact Singapore, the region and the rest of the global economy and whether there are lessons to be drawn from this crisis which sees Greece becoming the first developed country to default on an IMF debt.
(for the Prime Minister)
: Mdm Speaker, I am taking this question on behalf of the Deputy Prime Minister and the Chairman of Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS).
The direct impact of the crisis in Greece should not be significant. While it adds uncertainty in the European economic recovery, the European Central Bank and the European Union will likely take the steps necessary to safeguard the Eurozone financial system.
The direct impact of Greece on Singapore is also small. Greece accounts for just under 0.2% of our total trade and 0.1% of banking system assets. So, Singapore's financial systems continue to function in an orderly fashion.
Nevertheless, the situation could unravel. If Greece exits the Eurozone, now or later, it could trigger a broader loss of investor confidence in European integration. There could also be knock-on effects on the rest of the world. Overall, while there is no reason for alarm, we are closely monitoring developments in Greece and the Eurozone.
Ms Irene Ng also asked about Greece and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). When Greece missed a US$1.7 billion repayment to the IMF on 30 June this year, the Fund declared Greece to be in arrears. When a member country misses a payment to the IMF, the IMF continues to work with that member to help it clear its arrears. This has been the case in previous instances of arrears. It is also pertinent that the IMF has preferred creditor status, which means that loans granted by the IMF to a member must be repaid ahead of all other creditors.
The IMF has the scope to take a series of progressively stronger measures against a member in arrears. As an immediate step, the IMF will not permit the member further access to IMF resources. Where the arrears persist, the IMF could initiate procedures to withdraw that country's membership in the Fund and realise the loss. So far, no country has had to face what is in effect expulsion from the IMF due to persistent arrears, and no losses have been realised on IMF loans.
Greece's debts owing to the IMF are significant. However, the IMF has sizeable reserves that it can use to protect its members and lenders, should any loss arising from its loans to Greece eventually be realised. When member countries contribute resources to the IMF, our financial exposure is to the IMF and not the countries that the IMF lends to. The IMF, with the advantage it has from its preferred creditor status, has in turn always repaid its own creditors. Neither has the IMF ever had to use members' capital funds in the IMF to cover losses. On 1 July this year, the IMF reaffirmed that member countries' claims on the IMF are fully secure, and that it will continue to meet its obligations to its members and lenders.
Singapore has, therefore, not suffered any financial impact arising from Greece missing its repayment to the IMF. To reiterate, this is because, when Singapore as a member of IMF contributes to its resources, our financial exposure is to the IMF and not the countries that the IMF lends to. I should also mention that Singapore's loan commitment under the IMF's 2012 Borrowing Arrangements have not been activated, as the IMF has sufficient financial resources for its current lending programmes.
Ms Ng also asked about lessons to be drawn from this crisis, and there are indeed lessons every country can draw from the Greek crisis. There is much reflection within Europe on the incomplete design of the Euro project, and what further reforms are necessary in the Eurozone. However, there are also more fundamental lessons coming out of the problems in Greece, problems that some other countries share from time to time. To be brief, I will just highlight two lessons.
First, living within our means and ensuring that budget policies are sustainable. This means avoiding populist spending promises or benefits that can only be financed by accumulating debts indefinitely.
Second, avoiding a prolonged loss of competitiveness. Greece saw growth in wages and benefits that was much higher than productivity increases, and a severe loss of its economic competitiveness, including against its Eurozone partners like Germany. This has weakened its growth prospects, and compounded its build-up of debt.
:
While the Greek crisis will have negligible direct impact on Singapore's financial markets and banks, can I ask the Minister for his assessment of the risk of contagion.
: Madam, I thank the Member for the question. As I had mentioned just now, the direct impact is limited. If you look at the impact of the Greek crisis on the banking system in Europe – so, we look at the first round impact within Europe itself – even that alone, the direct impact of the Greek crisis on the banking system in Europe, that also is not that significant because European banks' exposures to Greece have come down significantly since the height of the crisis. The exposure was about 1.3% of the aggregrate balance sheets in September 2009, and it has since come down to 0.3% as at end of 2014. In addition, the European Central Bank and the European Union are likely to take steps necessary to safeguard the Eurozone financial system.
So, if you look at the potential for the spread of the impact or the impact beyond Greece to Europe, I think that there will be some impact, certainly, and the direct impact is on Europe, but that impact can be contained, given that the exposures have come down and steps are going to be taken.
But as I had mentioned just now, the broader contagion or the broader concern would be the unravelling of the situation because we cannot rule out the possibility of Greece exiting the Eurozone, whether now or later, and that indeed can have knock-on effects on investor confidence, not just in Europe, but also in the rest of the world. So, that is something that we are monitoring carefully. There is no reason for alarm now but we are aware and concerned about the risk, and we are monitoring the situation carefully.
asked
the Minister for Transport whether there are plans to relocate and expand the Choa Chu Kang Bus Interchange that has been in service since 1991 so as to address issues of overcrowding and congestion due to new buses introduced under the Bus Service Enhancement Programme.
:
Mdm Speaker, the Land Transport Authority (LTA) has assessed that the capacity of Choa Chu Kang Bus Interchange remains sufficient today, even with the additional bus services introduced as part of the Bus Service Enhancement Programme. During peak periods, the bus operator deploys marshals on the ground to facilitate commuter and bus circulation. LTA has also embarked on various traffic improvement measures around the interchange to smoothen the flow of buses. Over the medium term, my Ministry and other agencies are looking into redeveloping the Interchange in line with broader redevelopment plans for the Town Centre.
:
Mdm Speaker, I thank the Minister for his update. There have been some recent improvements but at its peak, there were occasions where buses waited about 20 minutes just to come in and out of the Interchange. My Parliamentary colleagues from the Group Representation Constituency (GRC) have also given some feedback. But in terms of the medium term, could the Minister be more specific in terms of the projected timeline, within next five to 10 years?
:
I would say within the next three to five years.
: First, I want to thank the Minister for the improvement works that have been done of late. I know LTA has put in a lot of effort because the Interchange falls in my division and we have seen the improvements from an about 20-minute wait, to today, at maximum, it takes about 10 minutes' wait to get to the Interchange. So, certainly, there is improvement but I think there is also room for further improvements because residents still do find some issues.
But, generally, I would also like to clarify with Minister whether in the Town Plan and in the redevelopment, whether the Ministry was also considering a more holistic development of the area, including whether it is going to include shops and other amenities, such as what we have seen in the new bus interchanges.
Secondly, would the Ministry also consider relooking at the flow of buses, because all the buses are coming in through Choa Chu Kang Loop, which is a very small road? That was applicable 20 years, 30 years ago, but with greater flow today and more services in future, whether LTA can take into consideration road flow and whether we can enhance, either the roads or change the locations in which buses enter and exit the Interchange.
: Mdm Speaker, I thank the Member for his two supplementary questions. On the redevelopment of the Town Centre, obviously this is something that will be done together with the URA, as well as other Government agencies which, I think the Member would be aware, have some tentative plans already for the area.
On the flow of buses, I think for the current Interchange located where it is, there have been a number of things that we have done - left turn on green arrow and localised widening of, for example, Choa Chu Kang Avenue 4, done over a period of time, finishing before the middle of next year.
As I talk about the possible redevelopment plans over the next three to five years, certainly, we will take into consideration how we can improve on the flow of buses in the new location, if that materialises.
To ask
the Minister for Transport (a) whether motorised bicycle riders are allowed to carry a pillion passenger; (b) how many accidents are there involving motorised bicycles in the past three years; and (c) whether there is an inter-ministry consultation on the importation of motorised bicycles.
: Question No 13.
(for the Minister for Transport)
: Mdm Speaker, a motorised bicycle is allowed to carry a pillion passenger if it has a seat for the passenger, the passenger is at least 16 years old, and both the rider and the passenger wear helmets. There were 13 accidents involving motorised bicycles in the last three years.
The Government's policy is that only motorised bicycles that meet the Land Transport Authority's (LTA) specifications can be used on public roads. LTA enforces this by affixing approved bicycles with a serialised seal for ease of identification. This mode of enforcement is more appropriate than restricting importation since some motorised bicycles may be imported for use on private property or for re-export. As announced in March, LTA will be conducting a public consultation on the rules governing the use of bicycles and other personal mobility devices, including motorised bicycles.
asked
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs whether the Home Team agencies have in place adequate rules and regulations to govern the use of coloured powder at large outdoor events.
15
asked
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs what measures are in place to minimise combustible dust hazards for events including the Colour Run.
(for the Minister for Home Affairs)
:
Mdm Speaker, may I have your permission to take Question Nos 14 and 15 together?
:
Yes, please.
: Madam, a cloud of powdered substance such as corn flour could ignite, even though it is not considered a hazardous material when packed or stored properly and used in the way it was intended, such as for baking or cooking. Under the Fire Safety (Petroleum and Flammable Materials) Regulations, the import, transport and storage of substances which are highly flammable and beyond certain threshold quantities require SCDF licences. The holders of such SCDF licences are required to impose stringent safety measures with regard to the handling of such substances. However, this does not cover less combustible substances in powder form such as corn flour.
Police will assess all relevant factors, including public safety, before issuing police permits or public entertainment licences for events. If necessary, the Police may impose conditions to prohibit hazardous activities. The event may also be disallowed entirely if it is deemed to pose a threat to public safety. Events involving temporary structures, such as stages, will also require an SCDF permit. This will be issued only if sufficient fire safety measures are in place.
For events which are not regulated by the SPF or SCDF, the SCDF may still issue a Fire Hazard Abatement Notice under the Fire Safety Act, if they are aware of the existence of any potential fire hazard. A person served with such a notice will have to take steps to abate the fire hazard, such as ceasing the use of flammable materials. Should information be received by Police that a particular event may pose a threat to public safety, the Police will use all measures provided for in the law, including the seizure of items or stopping of the event, to prevent the commission of an offence.
The Colour Run event in Singapore will require a police permit and the post-run party will require a public entertainment licence. An SCDF permit is also needed for the erection of a stage at the post-run party. Both SCDF and SPF are in contact with the event organisers. The agencies will assess the hazards posed by the materials intended for use at the event, before granting the necessary approvals. Restrictions or additional safety measures may also be imposed to manage safety risks. This may include replacing combustible powder with non-combustible materials such as water mist, limiting the powder dispersal zone, disallowing sources of ignition within a certain radius, or prohibiting the discharge of powder at mass congregation areas such as the end point of the run.
:
I thank the Minister for the comprehensive reply. Firstly, I would like to express my condolences to the family members of the victims who were injured in the Taiwan colour party disaster recently. I want to ask the Minister a few supplementary questions. First, what are the lessons learned from the colour party incident in Taiwan that are taken into consideration in the regulations governing such similar events in Singapore? How many applications had MHA received pertaining to the use of coloured powder during public events in the past one year? And did MHA reject any of these applications or had MHA imposed additional conditions, as learned from the recent incident in Taiwan?
: Madam, police permits have previously been issued for colour-run events in 2013 and 2014 and police permits have also been issued for annual Rang De Holi events since 2012. Rang De Holi events are to celebrate spring and involve the use of coloured powder. Whether coloured powder would be permitted in future events would depend on the Singapore Police Force (SPF) and SCDF's assessment of the safety risks posed by such activities.
In terms of the lessons learned, I think clearly one key point is whether adequate precautionary measures have been put in place when such events are organised. As I explained earlier, in general, there are a range of measures between the Police and the SCDF that can be put in place to ensure public safety and security for such events through the permits and licences that are issued. Beyond that, arising from this recent episode that occurred in Taiwan, the Police and SCDF are looking in a more detailed manner into the incident, its causative factors and, therefore, what lessons we can draw from that and impose appropriate additional conditionality if such events are to continue in Singapore.
:
One supplementary question. I was wondering, based on events such as this, whether there is a consideration to maybe have a separate category, as the Minister mentioned earlier about partially or not truly combustible materials, so that you can look into potential sources of combustible hazards.
:
Madam, I thank the Member for his suggestion, and I appreciate why he raises this. But I do want to point out that, in a sense, almost anything that is potentially combustible can pose a danger. It just depends on the level of concentration. Therefore, if we were to go about listing them, I think it will be a very long list. So I think we have to go on a risk-based approach to this. So, clearly, the highly combustible substances are very tightly regulated. Beyond that, those substances which are of relatively low combustible property, I think we should let the authorities look at this, especially the SCDF, and make the assessment. It may pertain to how it is used or additional restrictions on thresholds, in terms of how much quantities are brought into a particular event or an activity. So, let the SCDF and SPF make their assessment, and if there is a need for further fine-tuning of our regulations, we will do so. But we are not, at this stage, contemplating expanding the coverage in a manner that covers all combustible materials because that would be quite impractical.
asked
the Minister for Manpower (a) whether foreign worker levies no longer serve their original objective but only erode companies' margins; (b) whether reducing or doing away with the levies will benefit the Singapore workforce; and (c) what plans does the Ministry have to help our businesses, particularly SMEs, cope with their manpower challenges.
: Mdm Speaker, foreign worker levies, together with other measures such as the sector-specific Dependency Ratio Ceiling (DRC), serve three purposes: manage the demand for foreign workers (FWs); encourage productivity gains; and level the playing field for Singaporean rank-and-file workers to sustain real income growth.
DRC alone is not sufficiently responsive to the diverse needs across industries and companies. Set too high, we will not be able to moderate the inflow of foreign workers. Set too low, it will be rigid and will hit SMEs hardest. Hence, we need to complement the DRC with foreign worker levies to strike a better balance between a rigid quota cap and a flexible price mechanism.
Reducing or doing away with levies would not benefit Singaporean rank-and-file workers. Employers may prefer to hire cheaper foreign workers to maximise their quota. The salary of local workers may also be suppressed due to lower cost of hiring foreign workers. In addition, this could deter investment in manpower-lean technology and solutions.
The challenge faced by all firms, including SMEs, is to adapt to our new economic and manpower landscape. The Government has various schemes in place to support firms in making this transition. SPRING, for example, has the Innovation and Capability Voucher (ICV) to help SMEs to invest in productivity improvements. Since 2012, about 16,000 vouchers had been awarded and 90% of which were given to very small businesses.
On the part of the Ministry of Manpower (MOM), we lower the foreign worker levy for skilled work permit holders. This is to encourage employers to upgrade the skills of the workers, including work permit holders, so as to achieve higher productivity.
:
Mdm Speaker, while the increase of foreign workers has moderated from about 80,000 in 2011, to about 26,000 in 2014, which are the specific sectors that foreign workers had gone into and what portion of this increase goes to SMEs in 2014?
:
Mdm Speaker, later on, there is a PQ on growth of foreign workers, maybe I can answer that.
asked
the Minister for Manpower (a) in the past eight years, what has been the percentage and absolute number of growth of (i) foreign workers in total (ii) foreign workers in each industry/sector/segment; (b) what is the projected number of (i) foreign domestic helpers (ii) care givers (iii) healthcare workers for the next 15 years in view of the increase in the ageing population with 900,000 Singaporeans above the age of 65 years; and (c) whether the Government intends to reduce or cap the growth of foreign workers.
: Mdm Speaker, the overall annual growth of foreign workers has moderated from 144,500 in 2007, eight years ago, to 34,000 in 2014. In other words, the growth rate has slowed from 19% year-on-year to 3% year-on-year over the eight years.
This significant slowdown in foreign worker growth occurred in all sectors over the past eight years. For the services sector, the slowdown was from 54,500 to 21,500; in other words, 28% year-on-year growth to 5% year-on-year growth. For the construction sector, it slowed down from 36,000, or 23% year-on-year growth, to 9,700, or 3% year-on-year growth. Likewise, in the case of the manufacturing sector, the slowdown was from 42,000 to a negative growth of 5,400; in other words, from 18% year-on-year growth to a contraction of 2%.
The Ministry of Health (MOH) had projected that the number of healthcare professionals needed would increase from 46,000 in 2011 to 78,000 in 2030 to cater to an ageing population with higher healthcare needs. The number of support care staff, such as healthcare assistants and nursing aides, would also need to increase by about 9,000 over the same period, from 2011 to 2030. In addition, to assist with care-giving duties at home and supporting families with elderly and children, the National Population and Talent Division (NTPD) expects demand for foreign domestic workers to increase to about 300,000 by the year 2030.
Our aim is to moderate the inflow of foreign manpower at a pace that we can accommodate. Currently, the foreign share of our workforce is about one-third. We intend to maintain this. This means that the pace of foreign workforce should grow broadly in tandem with the growth of our local workforce as we move forward.
asked
the Minister for Foreign Affairs whether he can provide an assessment of the impact that the various Asia-Africa meetings, held in Jakarta in April 2015, will have on increasing trade and economic cooperation between Africa and ASEAN.
(for the Minister for Foreign Affairs)
: Mdm Speaker, the Asian-African Conference hosted by Indonesia is an important platform for political dialogue and economic cooperation between our two regions. I represented Singapore at the Ministerial Meeting and Prime Minister attended the Summit. The Conference was well attended by leaders from both regions.
The strong turnout of Asian leaders at the Conference was a positive signal and demonstrated the region's interests in engaging Africa. We hope the momentum generated can lead to closer economic cooperation and better trade and investment relations between Asia and Africa.
The Conference brought together two growing regions – Asia and Africa. Individually, both regions are doing well, growing at more than 5% last year. There is much potential for increased inter-regional economic cooperation.
Earlier this year, the African Union adopted a new "Agenda 2063" encompassing a vision for Inclusive Growth and Sustainable Development. Indeed, we are seeing political and economic transformation in Africa which has created new opportunities for cooperation.
In East Asia and in ASEAN, we need to improve our understanding of Africa's diversity and potential. In Singapore, we are beginning to step up our engagement with more African countries through bilateral forums and trade missions. The Singapore Business Federation has organised 13 trade missions to Africa in the past four years. To support our businesses' increased engagement with Africa, International Enterprise Singapore opened two commercial centres in Accra (Ghana) and Johannesburg (South Africa). We have also been working to conclude Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs) and Avoidance of Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs) with more African countries to boost investors' confidence in Africa. These steps will position us better to seize new business opportunities in Africa as the inter-regional trade and economic ties deepen.
We are also doing more to support human resource development and capacity building in governance for African countries. Since the inception of the Singapore Cooperation Programme in 1992, almost 8,000 African officials have attended our SCP programmes in areas such as civil aviation, economic development, and public administration and governance.
In August last year, we welcomed Foreign Ministers from seven Sub-Saharan African countries to Singapore for a Ministerial Exchange visit themed "Singapore-Africa: Partnering for Growth", followed by the Africa-Singapore Business Forum. These platforms allow us to engage African officials at different levels to strengthen our mutual understanding.
asked
the Minister for National Development whether first-time HDB applicants with foreign spouses are eligible for the Married Child Priority Scheme (MCPS) and, if not, whether HDB can consider including them in this scheme.
:
Yes, they are eligible, if they have a Citizen or Permanent Resident child.
asked
the Minister for National Development (a) whether the Government is concerned about the recent record price of $31 million paid for a coffee shop in Bukit Batok which follows the $23.8 million transaction in 2013 for a coffee shop in Hougang; and (b) what measures is the Government taking (i) to mitigate the downstream impact of such high transactions on stall rentals and the price of cooked food in those coffee shops; and (ii) to prevent property speculation in coffee shops which many lower income residents depend on for affordable food.
: In the past five and a half years, there were 32 resale transactions involving coffee shops: 10 were below $5 million, 12 between $5 and $10 million, eight between 10 and 15. The two transactions at Hougang and Bukit Batok were clearly outliers, but these were market transactions between private entities. If they miscalculate and overpay and, hence, need to charge above market rentals or food prices, they are at risk of losing their tenants or customers and may become insolvent.
We want our HDB residents to have access to affordable food. We do so through several means. First, HDB no longer sells its coffee shops; it only lets them out for rental. Second, we ensure a sufficient supply of coffee shops to maintain competition. For example, there are three other coffee shops near the transacted coffee shop in Bukit Batok, and four other coffee shops and a new hawker centre next to the transacted coffee shop in Hougang. Third, HDB continues to build new coffee shops. For example, it will build 62 new coffee shops in the next three years. We are ready to further ramp up the supply if there is clear demand for it. In addition, NEA will be building 20 new hawker centres by 2027.
: Madam, I have three supplementary questions. First, what is the Government's position regarding property speculation in eating houses in HDB estates? Does it take a laissez-faire approach that these are free market transactions between buyer and seller or is it willing to step in to prevent speculation altogether in HDB eating houses?
Second, to-date, what concrete ways has HDB intervened to prevent speculation and excessive price increases in the sale and purchases of HDB eating houses?
And third, would the Government consider requiring that HDB eating houses be sold back only to HDB when they are put up for sale so that HDB will have more control over rents and food prices at these eating houses?
: Madam, the Member observed that there was speculation, using these two transactions. I doubt it because I checked the two cases. The seller of the Bukit Batok coffee shop had been there for 20 years before he sold it and the one in Hougang at least 10 years before he sold. So, these were clearly not speculators. In fact, they are operators. They actually operated the coffee stalls in the coffee shops.
What are the concrete ways? I thought that was explained in my reply.
Thirdly, could we force the shops to be sold back to HDB? I do not think, legally, I can do so.
:
Thank you, Madam. I would like to ask the Minister whether he can look into having a hawker centre in Bukit Batok because we do need one and I think without the hawker centre, the only place that people go for food is really that food centre that is now being sold for $31 million. So, I hope the Minister could work with NEA to just give us a hawker centre in Bukit Batok.
:
Madam, I thought NEA has already announced that there will be a new hawker centre coming up in Bukit Batok.
:
Yes, probably that specific location would be good.
:
We will find a good location.
asked
the Minister for Social and Family Development (a) if he can elaborate on the senior group homes model for elderly Singaporeans in public housing blocks; (b) how many of such homes and beneficiaries are there in Singapore currently; and (c) whether the Ministry will work with HDB to make such senior group homes more prevalent in all housing estates.
: Mdm Speaker, MSF started the Senior Group Homes in 2012 to promote ageing-in-place for seniors who are too frail to continue living alone in HDB rental flats.
Each Senior Group Home is located in a rental block and comprises five to eight units of flats. Each unit is shared by two to three frail seniors. MSF funds Voluntary Welfare Organisations to operate the Homes. They coordinate and monitor a range of services for the seniors. Examples of services include Home Care, rehabilitation services, and encouraging the seniors to engage in social activities in the community. The residents are also encouraged to provide mutual support to one another.
Two Senior Group Homes are currently in operation with a capacity of 36 places, and we are completing another 12 Homes in different towns this year. When fully operational, the 14 Homes will accommodate up to 250 seniors.
MSF will review the take-up and plans for Senior Group Homes after they are rolled out this year.
: I thank the Minister for the reply. I think the Senior Group Home is a great model because it allows for more inclusiveness in our community. I have two questions. One is: can this model be extended beyond rental flats? Can it go into new flats that are built for the future so that persons who are elderly and who can still live with some supervision can be included in the mainstream society?
The second question is: can this model also be extended to beyond elderly persons? For example, persons with special needs and disabilities who, similarly, could live a bit more independently in mainstream society with some supervision instead of going to nursing homes or residential homes.
: Mdm Speaker, the Government is building up our home and community care options to support our seniors to live and be cared for in their own homes. We are looking beyond just rental flats. Obviously, with the demographics going the way they are, we will have a lot more older people living in our estates and, therefore, we need to look at how best to cater for this.
For seniors with higher care needs, MOH has introduced subsidised centre-based elderly care services which include day care for seniors and healthcare services, such as community rehabilitation and centre-based nursing. MOH also provides additional support for seniors at home in the form of home-based healthcare and social care services. These include home medical and home nursing as well as home personal care, such as help with personal care and hygiene. MOH also has caregiver support schemes to support families who are caring for their elderly at home. So, whether this particular model can be extended, we are in the process of looking at how best to design our living spaces, as we go forward into the future.
There are many different views. We are going to try out different things. The whole idea is to see how best to integrate and to have our elderly living in and amongst us. You will find that for some of the needs, as we discussed earlier, about people with special disabilities and so on, some of the needs overlap with some of those for the elderly folks. In terms of providing some of these services, for some of them, there will be an overlap. This is a work-in-progress but it is something that we are, as a Government, dealing with it quite comprehensively.
The ageing issues encompass so many different things. Healthcare is one. Our living space itself is quite critical. So, we are looking at that. This model in itself, I think, will allow us to also have a glimpse into, firstly, are we able to scale it, and, secondly, what aspect of that you can incorporate into, perhaps, something that is more mainstream and across the board.
While we are looking at elderly Singaporeans with needs, we will also find, as the Member has mentioned, younger Singaporeans who may have special needs. The whole idea is to be able to provide these services and support in the community. The way we ought to look at it also is for those who may not meet the age criterion – we could argue whether it is at 55, 65 or whatever age it may be – but the question is, really, about needs and that actually transcends the ages. If we do have Singaporeans with specific needs, we can look at how best to accommodate them.
I suspect that some of these services that are provided will be able to cater for that but there may be very specific and specialised needs which persons with disabilities may not be as addressed through those service providers. The numbers are very different from I think the numbers I believe that we will be having. So, in those circumstances, we need to look at alternative models of how best to support them.
asked
the Minister for Social and Family Development whether the Ministry can simplify the current process and reduce the costs incurred by family members who wish to be appointed as deputies of persons with disabilities under the Mental Capacity Act.
: Mdm Speaker, the Ministry recognises the challenges families may face when they need to make an application to the Court to appoint a proxy decision maker or what we call a "deputy" for their loved ones. MSF is working actively with the Family Justice Courts to simplify the process of deputy applications.
Improvements which we intend to make include changing forms and rules, providing standard templates for key documents, such as medical reports, and enabling individuals to apply on their own without a lawyer.
While we do more to simplify the application process, we also need to make sure that we continue to safeguard the interests of the mentally incapacitated individuals. We aim to complete our review and introduce the improvements in the fourth quarter of 2015. We do encourage those who have particular feedback and suggestions for improvements on how we should manage the process, to let us know so that we can incorporate them into the review itself.
To ask
the Minister for Manpower in order to help those self-employed who may not have sufficient savings in the CPF to buy a house (a) whether the Ministry can allow the CPF account holder, upon reaching his contribution ceiling for Medisave, to channel the excess contributions to his Ordinary Account instead of the Special or Retirement Account; and (b) if the CPF account holder can prove that he has substantial insurance policies to cover future medical expenses, whether he can be allowed to opt to only contribute to his Ordinary Account.
:
Question No 23.
: Mdm Speaker, self-employed persons or SEPs in short, are only required to contribute to their Medisave Account. Medisave Account contributions in excess of the Medisave Contribution Ceiling are automatically transferred to a CPF member's Special Account if he is below 55 years old, or Retirement Account if he is aged 55 and above. This is to help CPF members save more for their retirement needs as interest rates for the Special and Retirement Accounts are higher than the Ordinary Account, and members will enjoy better returns on these savings.
SEPs who wish to save more in the CPF for their housing and retirement needs can make voluntary contributions and enjoy tax relief on these contributions subject to limits.
Er Dr Lee has also asked whether an SEP can opt to only contribute to the Ordinary Account, if he can prove that he has substantial insurance policies to cover future medical expenses. Medisave savings can be used to pay the hospitalisation expenses and other healthcare expenses, such as outpatient treatment for approved chronic diseases and recommended screening and vaccinations.
Besides hospitalisation expenses, Medisave savings can also be used to pay for the premiums of MediShield Life and ElderShield. MediShield Life will cover all Singaporeans and Permanent Residents for life. Unlike MediShield Life, coverage provided by other medical insurance policies may not be guaranteed for life. More importantly, his Medisave can also be used to pay for the medical expenses or MediShield Life premiums of his spouse, children, parents and grandparents. Hence, CPF members with comprehensive medical insurance policies are not exempted from contributing to their Medisave.
: Order. End of Question Time.
[
Pursuant to Standing Order No 22(3), Written Answers to Question Nos 24-26 and 28-30 on the Order Paper are reproduced in the Appendix. Question No 27 has been postponed to the next available sitting of Parliament
.]
:
Mdm Speaker, I rise in motion to support the Bill. Please allow me to make my speech in Malay.
:
The provision of a clear and fixed timeframe for bankrupts will incentivise them to work harder within the timeframe stipulated to discharge themselves from their status as a bankrupt. This would certainly enable them to recover and resume their daily lives, and look forward to a brighter future.
I also hope that the measures that will be taken to transfer the responsibilities from an Official Assignee to a public trustee when banks or large corporations are applying for bankruptcy proceedings against a debtor will result in them being more circumspect before providing credit to their clients.
However, there are some concerns that I would like to raise with regard to the Bill. While it is good that this Bill provides fixed timelines for someone to be discharged from bankruptcy, nonetheless, will this possibly turn into an easy option for those who are in debt? This may bring about an unintended effect.
I am also concerned over the possibility that financial institutions may increase the cost of borrowing across the board because they need to appoint public trustees for bankruptcy management cases. What are the measures that can be taken to mitigate this possible increase in cost of borrowing?
Mdm Speaker, please allow me to continue in English. My next area of concern is with regards to the appointment of private trustees by institutional creditors. Are there checks and balances in place to ensure that the appointed private trustees carry out their job efficiently and fairly especially given the fact that since bankruptcy cases can be very long-drawn. I believe that our efforts in improving the efficiency of the discharge process and in relieving the burden placed on our OA may be counter-productive if private trustees do not carry out their duties properly. This would in turn hinder the bankrupt's motivation and capability to break free of his status. As much as we want to encourage bankrupts to strive to repay their dues and enforce punitive action on those that do not, we need to ensure that the administrative system is fully capable of supporting this endeavour.
I always believe that prevention is better than cure where bankruptcy is concerned. While public education on financial management are available through channels such as MoneySENSE, are there any plans by the Government to have better public outreach to educate potential borrowers on the risks of taking unnecessary credits? Personally, I have come across cases where people are at the risks of being made bankrupts because they act as guarantors to loans taken by others or being unable to service the loans taken for risky business investment or simply loans taken for buying a car.
Mdm Speaker, bankruptcy is certainly a circumstance that nobody would want to find themselves in. However, I am of the firm belief that with proper education on financial prudence, we can certainly reduce the risk of individuals in landing themselves in such situations. For those that out of circumstance fall through the cracks – I hope that this amendment may at least allow them to be in a better position to pick themselves up again. Once again Madam, I support the Bill.
: Mdm Speaker, I support the Bill. In a nutshell, the main aim of the Bill is to introduce a fixed timeframe of seven or nine years for bankrupts to be discharged even if they have not met their target contribution. The trade-off is that the bankrupt will have his name permanently on a public register. This Bill reminds me of a point I raised some years back.
After the Asian Financial Crisis, many businessmen were declared bankrupt with enormous debts, some amounting to tens of millions of dollars. One would intuitively think that a bankrupt with a small debt would find it easier to get himself discharged than one with a large debt. But things did not always work out that way. Some bankrupts with large debts were able to secure a discharge because, as the Courts have rightly and logically pointed out, there was no purpose keeping them bankrupt because it would be impossible for them to ever fully discharge their debts. On the other hand, those with smaller debts could, over time, pay off their debts and therefore found it difficult to be discharged until their debts were fully paid off. That did not seem to be correct.
Under the Bill, bankrupts can now look forward to a fixed point of discharge, even if they do not repay the target sum. This is more equitable, so everyone is treated the same. But as the rule may encourage bankrupts to drag their feet and wait out the time period, the Bill provides that those who do not fully discharge their debts will have their names permanently retained on a register that the public and financial institutions can access. This strikes a sensible balance. It treats all bankruptcies equally regardless of the value of the debt and allows their discharge. It also incentivises a bankrupt to pay off his debts, which is also fair to his creditors.
The road out of bankruptcy is not always a road. Nonetheless I would suggest that the Official Assignee (OA) be given a wider discretion to remove a bankrupt's name from the public register in appropriate cases, even though the target contribution has not been fully paid. There may be instances where a person was made bankrupt not because of any financial irresponsibility or culpability, but in cases where he is not to be blamed – large medical bills or because he guaranteed a relative's debts. The OA's wider discretion would allow our new scheme to apply in a compassionate and flexible way where the circumstances warrant it.
Next, a point on the OA's power to vary the bankrupt's monthly contribution and target contribution. Under the Bill, the OA determines the bankrupt's monthly and target contribution after the administration date of the bankruptcy. With regard to variations after the initial determination, section 86D only specifies three circumstances in which the OA may issue a certificate reducing the bankrupt's monthly and target contributions. Reductions in all other circumstances, as well as any upward revisions, will fall to be handled by the court upon the application of the OA.
There should be no need for the OA to apply to court to vary the contributions. After all, the OA makes the initial determination after taking into account a wide range of factors. Requiring the OA to seek a court order makes the process cumbersome, adds to the court's burden and increases costs. The court already has the power to review the decisions of the OA where a bankrupt or his creditor is dissatisfied with the OA's decision. The OA should be given the power to make all variations, and the court should step in only where the bankrupt or a creditor challenges that decision.
Lastly, I would like to comment on the move to require institutional creditors to appoint private trustees when applying for bankruptcy proceedings. This is in principle a good idea. The OA's resources are limited and I have received feedback from residents that its officers are sometimes difficult to reach. The Bill seeks to lighten the burden on the Insolvency Office. Banks, finance companies and large businesses will be made to play a more active role in managing the bankrupt's affairs, and they have the resources to do that.
The question then becomes one of impartiality and even-handedness. Since private trustees are appointed by the creditors, how will they ensure that they will act fairly? This is a matter of concern, since some 51 percent of bankruptcies involve financial institution creditors. I note that the OA is still responsible for overseeing and monitoring the private trustees. But given the OA's resources, how effective will that oversight be? Hence, I would like to ask the Minister: what assurance do we have that this new scheme will work fairly?
: Mdm Speaker, I thank the Members for speaking in support of the Bill. Let me now respond to the queries raised by Members.
Mr Zainal Sapari suggested debt advisory services to educate Singaporeans on the risks of obtaining unnecessary credit. We do have in place educational programmes. As Mr Zainal noted, the MoneySENSE programme provides the public with education on financial management. MOE also has programmes to educate our students on the need to be prudent. MinLaw will nevertheless pass on Mr Zainal's feedback to the relevant agencies for consideration as to what else can be done by way of public education.
At the end of the day though, it really boils down to one principle – which is not to spend or borrow more than you can afford to pay or repay. In cases of genuine need, rather than seeking credit which one cannot afford to service or to repay, I would urge those in that situation to seek financial assistance or financial counselling, which is available, before incurring the debt.
Mr Thomas Chua spoke about the need to promote entrepreneurship and be less risk-averse. We are mindful of this. But we are also mindful of the fact that some bankruptcies arise from business failures. So, the issue is how to encourage financial prudence without stifling entrepreneurship. There needs to be a balance between taking risks and being responsible. The amendments in this Bill are intended to strike the right balance between these two objectives.
Mr Gan Thiam Poh suggested having an alternative process to deal with those who default on debts that do not exceed the new threshold of $15,000. We have a threshold for bankruptcy because it is costly, and it impacts the debtors and creditors, and hence it should not be undertaken lightly. However, bankruptcy is not the only means of recovery. We do already have in place other means for recovery, which is through the Court process.
Disputes on lower value claims can be resolved or pursued at the Small Claims Tribunal, or the Magistrate's Courts using the new simplified civil process. Organisations, such as Credit Counselling Singapore, also assist debtors to negotiate debt repayment plans with financial institutions.
Mr Gan was concerned that the increased debt threshold could encourage creditors to lend more or impose more costs. It is unlikely that creditors will lend more simply because of the raised threshold. In deciding whether and how much to lend, the primary consideration for creditors is the debtor's ability to repay the debt. That assessment would have to made independent of the mode of recovery, whether it is bankruptcy or some other means.
Mr Zainal Sapari, Mr Hri Kumar and Ms Sylvia Lim had queried on the checks and balances in place to ensure that private trustees carry out their jobs properly and do not overcharge. There are a number of checks and balances in respect of private trustees, in the Bill. Private trustees are required to put up security, which can be forfeited by the OA if the private trustee does not fulfil his duties and obligations.
Private trustees are supervised by the OA and are required to submit reports to the OA at specified times. Bankrupts can provide feedback or make complaints at any time – they need not wait until the fifth or seventh year.
As for Members' letters, if it relates to offences or the conduct of a private trustee, they should be addressed to the OA. But if it relates to the administration of the bankruptcy estate, they can write to the private trustee directly. They may write to the OA also, who will help liaise with the private trustee.
Ms Lim asked how the appointment of private trustees may affect the administration of bankruptcies. As mentioned in my speech yesterday, the OA acts as trustee in over 99 percent of bankruptcies. Out of the total number of bankruptcies, it is estimated that about 60% are brought by institutional creditors. With the requirement for institutional creditors to nominate private trustees, the number of cases handled by the OA would be reduced. Basically, the approach is that institutional creditors should bear the cost of administration, which will allow the OA to focus more on the smaller businesses and lenders who have lent to someone who goes into bankruptcy.
With regard to the cost of private trustees, the Target Contribution is calculated without reference to the private trustee's fees. The fees therefore will not affect one's eligibility to be discharged.
Ms Lim and Mr Zainal asked whether the appointment of a private trustee would add to the bankrupt's costs and Ms Lim raised the example of a situation where the debt is let us say, $20,000, and in that case, would the debtor would have to bear a heavy cost burden, especially if lawyers or accountants are appointed as private trustees.
I think here, again, the point is that we must first look at the creditors. If the creditor is an institution, then it is likely to have calculated its risks, including the costs of bankruptcy. The basic question is whether the ordinary taxpayer should pay for the bankruptcy administration, when the creditor is a big bank, or whether we should ask the bank to pay for the costs. Our view is that the bank should pay. The way it works in practice is that private trustees are likely to have provided estimates or ballpark figures of their fees to the bank, beforehand.
The private trustees will also usually not agree to act unless the creditors agree to indemnify them for their fees and expenses in the event that the bankrupt's estate is insufficient to cover their costs.
Taking all of these into account, the net effect of the amendments is that the institutional creditors will now have to calculate before deciding whether, having regard to the total debt, it is cost-effective to proceed with the bankruptcy at all.
There is also a check on the private trustee's fees – they have to be approved by the creditors or the Court. And creditors have strong interests to approve reasonable fees because ultimately, it affects their returns.
Mr Zainal Sapari queried if the amendments would increase the costs of borrowing. As to this, I would say that the amendments will encourage institutional creditors to be more prudent in granting credit and recovering unpaid debts. This may reduce the rate of default, which in turn, will help lower the overall costs of borrowing. The alternative is for taxpayers to continue to subsidise the costs of the OA administering these bankruptcies, which is not desirable.
Mr Zainal also queried whether the fixed timelines for discharge will increase moral hazard associated with bankruptcy. We do not think it will. In fact, the opposite is intended. Bankrupts will have strong incentives to cooperate with the trustee as the trustees retain the discretion to discharge a bankrupt. And even if the trustee decides to discharge the bankrupt, the creditors may still apply to the court to object. Bankrupts who do not pay their Target Contribution in full will have a permanent record of their bankruptcy, which will affect their ability to obtain credit in future.
Mr Hri Kumar suggested giving the OA a discretion, either for a bankrupt to be discharged without his name appearing on the public register, or to remove a person's name from the register thereafter even though he has not paid his debts in full.
The provisions give the OA wide discretion on what may be available for inspection by the public. The Target Contribution is determined without reference to the debts owed by the bankrupt, but according to what reasonably their income is. Therefore, bankrupts who fail to pay the Target Contribution ought to remain on the register permanently. And the OA will exercise its discretion while taking this into consideration.
Mr Hri Kumar queried why the OA needs to apply to court to vary the Target Contribution after the initial determination. The Target Contribution is the key factor that affects a bankrupt's eligibility to be discharged. Once it is set, it becomes the reference point by which both the debtor and the creditor base their decisions and take their actions. Parties would have acted on the basis of certain expectations. If it can be changed too easily, it could be disruptive and could operate unfairly on either one of the interested parties, depending on the variation.
For that reason, if there are to be any changes, it should be done by the court, giving interested parties an opportunity to be heard. Since the scheme is new, we would prefer at this stage not to let the Target Contribution be changed too easily. After the framework has been in place for sufficient time for us to assess how it is working, we can always review it.
Ms Sylvia Lim queried how the Government arrived at the timeframes for differentiated discharge. The rationale for the timeframes is as follows.
Currently, the OA can issue a certificate of discharge only after three years. We have retained this. The seven-year period was introduced because reviews show that further realisations are minimal after seven years for most bankruptcies; and in recent years, most bankrupts were discharged about eight years after being made bankrupt. So, between three years and seven years, to strike a balance and to incentivise bankrupts to keep up with their monthly contributions, we decided that they should be eligible to be discharged in five years. That is approximately two months to calculate the Target Contribution, 52 monthly contributions and six months to process the discharge. That comes up to 60 months – or five years.
Ms Lim also asked about the number of repeat bankrupts and why they are subject to higher Target Contributions. Repeat bankrupts form under 4% of all bankrupts currently. So, it is really an exercise in balancing the interests of the people who have lent money, and the interests of the bankrupt. If it is too easy to get out of bankruptcy, then there will be a moral hazard – and society as a whole loses. The loss will also be on small creditors who will be less able to do the risk analysis, compared with larger creditors. Credit flow as a whole will be impacted. If a person who has been a bankrupt gets discharged and then becomes a bankrupt again, it is fair that he be held to stricter standards. The higher Target Contribution emphasises this. Nevertheless, the framework provides them with a chance to make a fresh start.
I believe I have addressed Members' queries. I would like to thank the Members for their support of the Bill, which will put bankruptcy in Singapore on a new and more progressive framework. Mdm Speaker, I beg to move.
:
Ms Sylvia Lim, you wish to ask a question? Yes, please.
: Thank you, Madam. I have one clarification for the Senior Minister of State. She mentioned that as far as the private trustees' fees are concerned, they do not factor into the calculation of the Target Contribution. At the same time, it is provided under the law that the debtor bears the primary responsibility of paying those fees. So, from where in the bankrupts' estate will these fees be paid out of?
: I believe we are talking about two separate issues. One, when I talked about setting the Target Contribution, when we look at the Target Contribution, you are really looking at the amounts that the debtor should repay. In calculating that, what is looked is at is the debtor's reasonable income or what he is likely to receive. So, the Target Contribution is set without reference to the private trustee's fees.
I believe what Ms Lim is asking about is where do the private trustees' fees get recovered from. She is right that ordinarily, they will come from the bankrupts' estate. So, if there is anything left over, obviously, it would have to go the private trustee first. But in doing that, for small amounts, obviously, if the private trustees' fees are too large, then it is not going to be recoverable and that operates as a disincentive for creditors to go after bankrupts for smaller amounts. My answer was in context of the question of what happens when you have a relatively smaller amount and whether the debtor will bear a heavy burden in fees.
So, you can see that the way it is designed is intended to make the creditors sit down and think, "Okay. This is how much the debt is. This is how much the debtor likely has in his estate. This is the amount of fees that the private trustees will have to be paid. If I appoint lawyers, there will be more fees as well. At the end of the day, is there anything left for me to recover?" In that sense, it encourages, firstly, the creditor to be prudent in lending; secondly, to make a very careful decision before deciding to go after somebody in bankruptcy.
[(proc text) The House immediately resolved itself into a Committee on the Bill. – [
]. (proc text)]
: Mdm Speaker, I beg to move, "That the Bill be now read a Second time."
The maritime cluster is a key component of the Singapore economy, contributing 7% of Singapore's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and employing more than 170,000 people. There are now over 130 international shipping groups in Singapore, carrying out a full range of activities. We are a major maritime nation and the world's fifth largest flag state. Hence, Singapore has a strong interest to ensure that the maritime sector is able to operate safely and securely. We have and will continue to work together with the international maritime community in this regard.
The Government intends to accede to the 1988 Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms located on the Continental Shelf, known as the SUA FPP. As the title suggests, the SUA FPP is intended to deal with unlawful acts against such platforms, such as fixed platform oil rigs. It will allow us to take action against those that seek to hijack or harm fixed platforms and those who work on the platforms. Acceding to the SUA FPP will not only protect Singaporeans on fixed platforms. It will also allow us to help other countries track and take action against those who have harmed their fixed platforms and personnel.
The proposed Maritime Offences (Amendment) Bill seeks to amend the Maritime Offences Act to give effect to the provisions of the SUA FPP. Let me highlight the key provisions of the Bill.
The new sections 7A to 7D of the Maritime Offences Act identify acts which will be offences under Singapore law, whether or not the acts are committed within Singapore's territorial waters or the offenders are Singapore nationals. These acts include firstly, the hijacking or intentional destruction of a fixed platform; secondly, intentional damage to a fixed platform so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, the safety of the fixed platform; thirdly, commission on board a fixed platform of an act of violence which is likely to endanger the safety of the fixed platform; and fourthly, threats to carry out some of these acts.
The penalty applicable to these offences, unless otherwise specified in the Maritime Offences Act, is life imprisonment. This takes into account the gravity and dire consequences of the offences, which could jeopardise the safety of persons and property, affect the operation of maritime services, and undermine public confidence in the safety of fixed platforms. This penalty is consistent with the practice in other countries, such as the United Kingdom.
Given that these offences can be transnational, section 11 is amended so that those that commit such offences may also be extradited to another country which is a party to the SUA FPP.
Mdm Speaker, being a party to the SUA FPP would demonstrate Singapore's firm commitment to deal with unlawful acts at sea. It also underscores our continuing commitment and contribution to international efforts to enhance maritime security. The proposed Bill ensures that we have the domestic legislation in place to comply with the obligations of the SUA FPP before accession. Mdm Speaker, I beg to move.
: There are no speakers on this Bill.
[(proc text) The House immediately resolved itself into a Committee on the Bill. – [
]. (proc text)]
: Mdm Speaker, I beg to move, "That the Bill be now read a Second time".
The Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS) (Amendment) Bill seeks primarily to effect the renaming of ISEAS as the "ISEAS−Yusof Ishak Institute", as announced by the Prime Minister at the 2014 National Day Rally.
ISEAS was established by the Government in 1968, to fill a vital need for a deeper understanding of the region. At that time, decolonisation was just ending. The newly-independent countries of Southeast Asia knew that regional integration was critical for survival, and on our part, Singapore had to find a place in a region that was beginning to find its way forward, away from colonial rule.
Since then, ISEAS has grown to be a reputable research centre and think tank dedicated to the study of socio-political, security and economic developments in Southeast Asia and its wider geo-strategic and economic environment. ISEAS continues to play an important regional role in nurturing scholarship and capacity building, providing insights on key issues and events. ISEAS' efforts in developing a network of relationships help deepen understanding among policy makers and scholars within the region and beyond.
We are proud to have ISEAS bear Encik Yusof Ishak's name. Encik Yusof was one of Singapore's pioneering leaders as the Yang di-Pertuan Negara and the first President of Singapore. His contributions, along with those of early Malay pioneers such as Mr Othman Wok, were critical to the success of our then-fledging nation-state, and continue to be a source of pride for our Malay community and our nation today. His convictions and life's work resonate strongly with ISEAS's foundational tenets, and it is befitting that his name will be borne by ISEAS.
Mdm Speaker, here I would like to share a few words from Encik Yusof, in Malay.
: Racial unity is very important for us. The future of our Republic depends on the solidarity and cooperation between all races − sharing the same aspirations and objectives to make Singapore a successful and prosperous country.
These words reflect Encik Yusof's firm belief that racial unity is a crucial tenet to Singapore's success, and encapsulate Encik Yusof's key message to Singaporeans during our early years of Independence. Singapore did not always enjoy the peace and prosperity that we do now. Our independence came suddenly. Our early years were fraught with bouts of unrest, driven by both internal and external forces. Encik Yusof, as our first President, played a key role to help restore trust and confidence amongst Singaporeans during this time that saw events that shook the nation, such as the 1964 racial riots.
One of the foundational principles is that our people are our greatest strength. We must understand, respect and value each person, regardless of race or religion. Encik Yusof lived out this principle throughout his tenure as President. His tireless visits to each constituency, and his countless outreaches to various racial and religious groups to share his vision and message, are testament to this. In his obituary speech to Encik Yusof Ishak, our Founding Prime Minister Mr Lee Kuan Yew described Encik Yusof as "a deeply religious man, but who did not allow his religion to hinder his relationship with non-Muslims, whether they were Christians, Hindus, Buddhists, Confucians, or atheists". Mr Lee described Encik Yusof as a man who stood for our multi-racial policies and believed in policies to modernise our society.
We are very fortunate that Encik Yusof was Singapore's Head of State at our founding moment. That he embodied our sovereignty assured our Pioneer Generation of Malays that they have a place in Singapore – he assured all races that this would be home for all. This would not be a Chinese nation or a Malay nation or an Indian nation; this would be a Singaporean Singapore, as our founding Prime Minister Mr Lee Kuan Yew had declared. President Yusof was the living personification of that promise. And he dedicated himself to fulfilling that promise, to the benefit of us all today. Because our Pioneer Generation of Chinese, Malays, Indians and Eurasians decided to make common cause with one another, we were able to remain a multi-racial nation.
Encik Yusof was a steadfast guide for Singapore throughout our early years. Our early leaders had to navigate numerous pressing issues, such as labour unrest, communal discord, and the urgent need to grow our economy and create jobs. They were keenly aware that solutions to these needed to be buttressed by knowledge of regional developments. ISEAS, established a mere three years after our Independence, has helped to deepen our understanding of our politically-volatile region. It has also strengthened ties amongst regional scholars, and built up a body of knowledge on developments in Southeast Asia.
Our success today has been built by pioneering leaders such as Encik Yusof, and institutions such as ISEAS that have helped to inform our leaders' policy decisions. The foundation for a strong nation is true today as in the past − peace and stability based on mutual understanding, within Singapore and beyond. Today, regional and geo-political realities are even more complex. The strategic framework in Asia is evolving, and Southeast Asian countries are accelerating and deepening their integration. Understanding Singapore's place in the economic, cultural and political context of the region remains crucial to our continued relevance. As we celebrate Singapore's 50th birthday, and honour the outstanding men and women who have shaped our nation and wrought our successes, it is fitting and timely to pay tribute to Encik Yusof through the renaming of ISEAS in his honour.
The ISEAS (Amendment) Bill provides for this renaming. It also provides for amendments to update the ISEAS Act.
Let me now highlight the key clauses in this Bill.
a) Clauses 2 to 5 and clauses 12 to 14 effect the renaming of the Institute as the "ISEAS−Yusof Ishak Institute", by amending the ISEAS Act and other legislation to reflect the new name. These clauses will come into effect on 12 August 2015, the 105th anniversary of Encik Yusof's birth.
b) Clauses 6 to 11 seek to update the ISEAS Act and will come into effect on 1 November 2015. Specifically,
i) Clause 6 streamlines the composition of the ISEAS Board from 22 to 15 members, and updates appointment authorities for the Board. Clause 7 accordingly reduces the quorum for the Board to five members, in line with the smaller size of the Board.
ii) Clause 8 removes section 7 relating to the Secretary of the Board, as it is no longer relevant.
iii) Clauses 9 to 11 update financial provisions.
iv) Clause 11 also inserts new sections to protect relevant ISEAS personnel from harassment and personal liability in the performance of their duties.
In closing, I would like to share Encik Yusof's exhortation to a young Singapore during our national celebrations, 50 years ago. Mdm Speaker, in Malay.
: "It is our intention to establish a more just and equal society. In it, all loyal citizens regardless of race, culture and religion are assured of a place. With equal opportunities in every sphere of life, they can develop their personalities to the fullest, which also means that they can give their best to society. … I am confident that all our citizens from all walks of life will on this day re-affirm and re-dedicate themselves to build a free, strong and united multi-racial society."
Let me share this in English: "It is our intention to establish a more just and equal society. In it, all loyal citizens regardless of race, culture and religion are assured of a place. With equal opportunities in every sphere of life they can develop their personalities to the fullest, which also means that they can give of their best to society. I am confident that all our citizens from all walks of life will on this day re-affirm and re-dedicate themselves to the building of a free, strong, united and multi-racial society." With Encik Yusof's words, Mdm Speaker, I beg to move.
:Mdm Speaker, this Bill is not simply about a change of name in a statutory body called the Institute of South East Asian Studies (ISEAS). This is about this Government's efforts to acknowledge and recognise a leader of the Malay community, an outstanding Pioneer Generation member, our first Head of State and the first President of the Republic of Singapore, Encik Yusof Ishak. Prime Minister Mr Lee Hsien Loong spoke about this in the 2014 National Day Rally. I support the move to acknowledge and honour our first President.
According to the biography stated in the Istana website, Encik Yusof Ishak was an outstanding sports man during his school days at Raffles Institution. He played hockey, cricket and many other sports. He served as a prefect and was co-editor of the Rafflesian. He was also the first student to been commissioned as a 2nd Lieutenant of the Singapore Cadet Corp. He initially worked for the
Warta Malaya
but because he wanted to have a newspaper that was owned by, run by and dedicated to the Malay community. Hence, he founded and became the 1st Managing Director of
Utusan Melayu
.
In 1959, when the PAP won the election and formed the government, they chose Yusof Ishak as the Head of State because he was a man of integrity, dignity, honesty and had high moral principles. On 3 December 1959, he took up the appointment as Yang di-Pertuan Negara of Singapore. On 9 August 1965, when Singapore ceased to be a state in the Federation of Malaysia and became an independent and sovereign State, Encik Yusof became the first President of the Republic of Singapore.
Unfortunately, many Singaporeans do not know much about him other than that he was the 1st President of Singapore. For myself, my main association with the name of Mr Yusof Ishak was when I studied at the Yusof Ishak House in NUS during my days as an undergraduate.
As a nation, we had made much progress since our Independence in 1965. However, as we mature as a society and become a more developed country, it is important for Singaporeans as a people to remember our history and to acknowledge people who had played important roles in the nation's development.
Encik Yusof Ishak is one such person whom we should acknowledge. He was a distinguished Malay and was a champion of racial harmony. After he was appointed, he worked very hard to meet people of different races and helped bring trust and confidence in the new Republic. He led Singapore through its most difficult early years including the racial riots. According to an article in
The Straits Times
, when he passed away, "people came out in their thousands" to bid farewell to their President. "For Encik Yusof Bin Ishak had always been a man of the people who throughout his public life and despite long periods of ill health had always put people above self." Thousands of people "stood in homage in neat disciplined lines, often six deep quiet and solemn faces to pay their respect and watch the funeral procession. They did not move away even when it began to rain mid-way through the 90-minute foot procession." That, Mdm Speaker, is a mark of the people's respect for our first President.
Whenever I speak to members of the Malay community, many of them are extremely proud of the fact that someone from their minority race had served with such distinction in the highest post of the nation, the President of the Republic of Singapore.
Mdm Speaker, in many other countries, important state leaders are honoured in different ways. In the USA, the first President of the USA, George Washington, the estate of George Washington was converted into a museum in his honour – Mount Vernon. In England, there is the Churchill Centre to look into preserving the historical legacy of Sir Winston Churchill. In France, the Government named the airport after their President Charles de Gaulle and also turned his home into a museum. In China, there is a Deng Xiaoping Memorial Hall named after Deng Xiao Ping. And in Taiwan, there is the Chiang Kai Shek Memorial Hall, named after Chiang Kai Shek.
Turning to the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS), it was set up in 1968 with the aim of being a leading research centre and think-tank dedicated to the study of socio-political, security and economic trends and developments in Southeast Asia and its wider geo-strategic and economic environment. It also aims to stimulate research and debate within scholarly circles, enhance public awareness of the region, and facilitate the search for viable solutions to the varied problems confronting the region, and also to serve as a centre for international, regional and local scholars and other researchers to do research on the region, and to publish and publicise their findings. It is thus an important institute carrying out important roles for the country, especially in relation to the neighbouring Southeast Asian countries. It is thus befitting the stature of Mr Yusof Ishak that such an important organisation is named after him.
Mdm Speaker, our Government must continue to find appropriate ways to honour leaders of the country who had made Singapore what it is today. Hopefully, this will allow Singaporeans to remember their roots and struggles which our forefathers had to overcome in our journey to become the Singapore that we see today. Mdm Speaker, I support the Bill.
: Mdm Speaker, thank you for allowing me to speak on this Bill which serves to honour one of Singapore's Pioneer leaders.
It is heart-warming that the Government has sought to rename the Institute of South East Asian Studies (ISEAS) to the ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute as it honours Singapore's first President, Encik Yusof Ishak. This was announced by the Prime Minister at the 2014 National Day Rally.
The renaming will take effect on 12 August 2015, the 105th anniversary of Encik Yusof Ishak's birth. This is timely for more reasons, as it is also our 50th year of Independence. So, we should do our best to honour our Pioneer leaders – the very leaders who laid the foundations for Singapore to grow and come this far. Encik Yusof's role in nation-building reflects the values of respecting elders that is embedded in our society and the Government's efforts to recognise our Pioneer Generation. It is a gesture that Singaporeans can be proud of, to honour Singaporeans who have been instrumental in our progress and development over the last 50 years − a reminder for generations of how we came to be this bright red dot on the world map.
Encik Yusof is a role model for younger Singaporeans as his exemplary life continues to be relevant even today. As our society continues to develop, race and religion are potential pressure points as they have always been in our history. Encik Yusof showed, through his life, that as a Singaporean he rose above sectarian interests and looked towards larger national interests. It is an important lesson for generations of Singaporeans to take note of and emulate him.
Encik Yusof stood for meritocracy, multiculturalism and modernisation, enduring values that are essential for Singapore's success. His many other values and attributes also mirror the very qualities that ISEAS has come to be known for, making it a perfect institution to reflect his values.
Encik Yusof excelled in many things he did, even before he came into public service. As Member Lim Biow Chuan mentioned, in school, he participated in all forms of sport. At the Raffles Institution, he played hockey and cricket and took part in swimming, weight lifting, water-polo and boxing. In 1933, he became Singapore's lightweight champion in boxing. I never knew that! As the most outstanding cadet of the School Cadet Corps, he became the first student ever in Singapore to have been commissioned by the then Governor as a Second Lieutenant in the Cadet Corps. He was a school prefect and was co-editor of
T
he Rafflesian
. As a leading research centre and think-tank, ISEAS is at the forefront of research in the region, excelling on many fronts, and in diverse fields – just like multi-talented Encik Yusof
Encik Yusof was also a leading public intellectual during Singapore's pre-independence and early independent history. In 1932, he joined the staff of
Warta Malaya
, the leading Malay newspaper of that time. His journalistic ability took him rapidly from the ranks to the top posts of Assistant Manager and Acting Editor within a short time. In 1938, he resigned from
Warta Malaya
and, with a few close friends, established the Utusan Melayu Press Ltd. In May 1939, the well-known
Utusan Melayu
came into being with Encik Yusof at the helm as its first Managing Director. He was subsequently was elected President of the Press Club of Malaya. Encik Yusof was also appointed Chairman of the Public Service Commission in Singapore in 1959, and in 1965 he became the Chancellor of the University of Singapore. The renaming of ISEAS is thus a fitting tribute of his contributions to advance the public intellect in Singapore and Malaysia.
It was not just in Singapore and Malaya that Encik Yusof was recognised. He was one of the first "sons" of Singapore who received accolade and recognition within Southeast Asia. Encik Yusof took up appointment as Yang di-Pertuan Negara of Singapore on 3 December 1959. He was conferred the First Class Order of the Darjah Kerabat (The Most Esteemed Royal Family Order of Brunei) by the Sultan of Brunei in 1960, and the Darjah Kebesaran Sri Maharajah Mangku Negara (SMN) by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia in 1963. As one of the early Singaporean leaders to receive widespread recognition and honour in the region, it is fitting that one of Southeast Asia's premier think-tanks be named after him.
As a member of the Malay community here in Singapore, this is also a proud moment to reflect on the achievements of one of our pioneers, a leader who excelled on all fronts, and who furthered the cause of the community through his work with
Utusan Melayu
and, subsequently, President of Singapore and in being one of our early pioneers to lead post-independence Singapore facing an uncertain future then.
In this respect, I would like to propose to the Ministry that ISEAS consider reciprocating this honour by leading a research project on Encik Yusof and highlighting his achievements and contributions to our young nation as well as the community at large. That would be a fitting honour for Encik Yusof and ISEAS. Mdm Speaker, can I continue in Malay, please.
: The Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS) is an eminent research centre and think-tank in this region, playing an important role that includes researching several important trends within this region. Since its establishment as a statutory body in 1968, ISEAS has emerged as an impressive centre within this region, and has cultivated a community of scholars who care deeply about the situation in this region.
Encik Yusof Ishak's name is forever remembered fondly by all Singaporeans as a respected leader and as our first President. He is an exceptional pioneer leader and his contributions are greatly significant not only to the Malay community, but at the national level as well. He is a great icon and exemplary Malay who was able to stand tall with the other races and, in fact, achieved much more by making a major contribution to the country. He embodied the Singaporean Muslim identity − someone who was pious but also close to and warm towards the non-Muslim communities.
He is an inspiration and a role model for our younger generation. He showed how we can step out from the cocoon of self-interest and the interest of our own communities, to fight for and contribute towards the nation's interests and progress. The values that he held dear are something that is treasured and had helped to further strengthen the prosperity, well-being and harmony of the community and the nation. He strongly supported the policies of a multiracial Singapore and meritocracy.
His heart was with the Malay community at all times, and he wanted them to progress together with the other races, based on those principles.
Fifty years have passed since Singapore's independence, and now we witness the outcome for ourselves – that the Malay community has attained many achievements that we can be proud of, based on the principles and values advocated by Encik Yusof Ishak and other pioneer leaders.
In this special year, as our people celebrate SG50, it will be very symbolic and fitting for us to pay tribute to and honour the huge contributions of our statesman, Encik Yusof Ishak, towards nation-building.
The re-naming of the eminent institution ISEAS into the ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, is one of several meaningful ways for the next generations to continue to remember his contributions and the values that he held dear.
To be sure, everything that he fought for was not meant to achieve fame, and he also definitely had never asked for such a thing. Nonetheless, this effort of ours is a simple gesture of appreciation towards a significant contribution and effort, and is consistent with our values of showing respect to our elders and our past leaders.
As a way to honour the services and contributions of Encik Yusof Ishak, I would like to suggest that ISEAS can also consider the possibility of spearheading a research project on this pioneer leader of ours, with the aim of highlighting his achievements and contributions to our young nation. This is a suitable and appropriate tribute to him and also to ISEAS. With that, Mdm Speaker, I support the amendment to the ISEAS Bill.
: Mdm Speaker, I support the renaming of ISEAS as the ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute to honour our first Head of State. It is most appropriate to name a leading research centre and think-tank, dedicated to the study of Southeast Asian societies, in honour of an illustrious President. As the Minister mentioned in his Second Reading speech, President Yusof Ishak guided us through turbulent times and into independence. It is, indeed, fitting to honour him in this year of our golden jubilee.
However, this Bill brings more than just the name change for ISEAS. It also seeks to change the structure of its Board of Trustees in a very fundamental way. Instead of the current structure that provides for the President and various organisations to nominate representatives to the Board, clause 6 of the Bill proposes that the Minister be the sole person to nominate all the Board members. Minister said that clause 6 was just "an update", but is that all that it is? On the face of it, the amendment will change the character of ISEAS – it appears to be a regression from its original statutory structure that guarantees representation of a diversity of interests, to one whose direction will be set by a Board consisting solely of a Cabinet Minister's appointees.
The current Board consists of a Chairman and Deputy Chairman to be appointed by the President and 19 other members who are appointed by various bodies to reflect the diverse stakeholders in the work done by ISEAS. The President appoints seven of the 19 members, three of whom from professional bodies and organisations. The four chambers of commerce each appoint a member to reflect the international and multi-ethnic business ties Singapore has with the region. The Lee Foundation and Shaw Foundation each appoint a member, reflecting charitable organisations. The National University of Singapore appoints six members from academia.
The Amendment Bill removes or reduces this diversity in the composition of the Board by cutting down the Board from 21 members to 14 members and giving the Minister sole power to appoint the entire Board. I find that very ironic that this Bill will rename ISEAS to honour the first President, but will remove the office of President henceforth from its historical association with ISEAS altogether.
It is useful to turn to the original purpose for which ISEAS was set up. During the parliamentary debate in 1968 when the ISEAS Bill came up for Second Reading, then-Minister for Education Mr Ong Pang Boon told the House that it was intended that the research activities of ISEAS would increase Singapore's understanding of its neighbours and help us to play a more effective role in the region. He further emphasised that the Board was to represent a wide spectrum of interests – academic, professional, commercial, charitable and governmental. There thus appeared to be a conscious decision that ISEAS should not be seen by our neighbours as an arm of Government but as a research institute where the Government was but one of many stakeholders.
One critical point to note is that under the Act, the Board of ISEAS is vested with the power to approve its budget and research programme. The composition of the Board will thus send a signal to the world about the direction of ISEAS.
Even if the Minister were to say that he would appoint persons from a wide spectrum of interests, the fundamental question remains. Why not continue to let the organisations under section 4 of the Act continue to make their own nominations? Why must the Board members now be Government-approved? Were there major problems arising from the way the Board of Trustees were diversely appointed? If the method has worked to produce excellent outcomes, why is the Government changing the method of composing the Board now?
The diversity of the Board and the autonomy of ISEAS are two sides of the same coin. The diverse way of composing the Board has allowed ISEAS to function as an autonomous think tank. The diverse way of composing the Board balances three ways in which the Minister for Education already has influence on the running of the Institute, as the Authoriser of payment of grants and aid to the Institute, as Appointer of three members to the 10-member Executive Committee, and as Possessor of powers to make rules for ISEAS, including the powers and functions of the Board.
Can ISEAS maintain its autonomy and independence with all the powers concentrated in the Minister with this Amendment Bill? More worryingly, is the concentration of powers to appoint the Board in the Minister a sign of things to come? Are there plans to turn ISEAS into a body that simply churns out knowledge for the government bureaucracy?
Mdm Speaker, the Workers' Party is supportive of renaming ISEAS as "ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute". However, we are of the view that failure to preserve the diversity and autonomy of the Board will undermine ISEAS' reputation as an independent research centre and think tank. Further, removing the office of President, our Head of State, from his role in ISEAS, and replacing him with a Minister, will adversely affect ISEAS' prestige and standing in the region and, indeed, beyond. Therefore, the Workers' Party objects to Clause 6 of the Bill to make the Minister the sole Appointer of all the Board members, replacing the President and other organisations.
Madam, in the spirit of supporting the renaming of ISEAS as "ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute", I urge the Government to rethink the Amendment Bill, to preserve the diversity, autonomy and presidential association of ISEAS. If the Government fails to do so, we will have to vote against the Bill to register our objection to clause 6. Thank you, Madam.
: Mdm Speaker, I would like to declare that I am a member of the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies Board of Trustees.
The late Yusof Bin Ishak was Singapore's first President. Most Singaporeans know this but not many would remember that he was both a scholar and an accomplished sportsman. He was in the Queen's Scholarship class at the Raffles Institution, and was, as we just found out, Singapore's lightweight Boxing champion in 1933.
In 1959, when Singapore gained self-government, Encik Yusof Ishak was appointed Chairman of the Public Service Commission. Later that year on 3 December, he was appointed Head of State, Yang di-Pertuan Negara. And when we gained independence on 9 August, Encik Yusof Ishak became the first President of the Republic of Singapore. At that point, he embodied our sovereignty and became the symbol of all the hopes, dreams and ambition of a young nation.
As President of a newly and suddenly-independent Singapore, he toured the island to reassure citizens, many of whom were deeply troubled by separation from Malaysia, and the uncertainties that laid ahead for Singapore.
At that moment of vulnerability, Encik Yusof's fierce loyalty to Singapore gave Singaporeans heart, courage and hope. His ardent belief in and support for a modern nation to be built on multiculturalism, reflecting the sentiments of many Singaporean at the time, helped Singapore grow into a unique, multi-racial and multi-religious society that we see today.
The Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS) was born just three years after Singapore itself. It is a research institute dedicated to the study of socio-political, security and economic trends and developments in Southeast Asia and its wider environment.
Planned before the founding of ASEAN and founded a year after ASEAN came into being, ISEAS has over the last 47 years contributed in important ways – though not always obvious to the general public – to the development of Southeast Asian Studies as a discipline of academic study, and more profoundly to the ontology of this region we today recognise and take for granted as "Southeast Asia".
Today, the Institute houses several study centres, a well-appointed library and a publishing unit. Its multi-disciplinary research in the three core areas of economic studies, social and cultural studies, and strategic and political studies is a boon for Singapore and the region. Its field research complement the theoretical work undertaken in universities, and ISEAS employs a multi-disciplinary approach, embracing social, cultural and anthropological studies, to explain changes in Southeast Asian countries and societies.
ISEAS' most apparent contribution over the years is, of course, the more than 2,500 academic books that it has published so far. The Institute has become a highly reputable publisher of research findings on Southeast Asia today.
ISEAS is also the home of three worthy academic journals, each produced by its different programmes:
Contemporary Southeast Asia
, dealing with political and strategic matters;
Sojourn
, dealing with social, cultural issues in the region; and the
Journal of Southeast Asian Economies
, dealing with economic issues.
The ISEAS Library is considered among the best Southeast Asian libraries in the world. Over the last 10 years, its collection of private papers has increased impressively, and now includes collections on prominent leaders from Singapore and Malaysia, including S. Rajaratnam, Tan Cheng Lock, Lim Kim San, David Marshall, and Tun Dr Ismail, among others.
ISEAS' greatest comparative advantage lies in the fact that it is located in Southeast Asia and that most of its researchers are from the region itself. ISEAS has for almost five decades been acting as the point of contact for researchers from all over the world wishing to meet up with their peers in the region. It has now a veritable network of Southeast Asian scholars who are based at various locations throughout the world. Cornell University in the United States, for example, is directly involved in the editorial work of its journal,
Sojourn
. Chulalongkorn University works with the Institute to conduct surveys on Thailand. ISEAS has also recently facilitated meetings of Myanmar economists on the economic development of the country.
The Institute has remained independent where its research interests are concerned. In balancing academic interests with policy-making, ISEAS has facilitated the use of social sciences with practical outcomes. It is a major contributor to the regionalisation of Southeast Asian research: the study of the region, by the region and for the region.
As a historian, I am interested not just in things past, but why people value this. There is, of course, the pragmatic utilitarian view. But then there is a view that the past is valuable in itself. That it is an essential part of Singapore's identity. Without a rich sense of history, we have a shallower sense of self.
At 50, the Singaporean identity, more than ever, demands a knowledge, appreciation and valuing of its past. And our past is rooted in the region. It was an early desire to understand the region in which we are rooted that the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies was first conceived. The Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS) Bill was first tabled in May 1968 by then-Minister for Education Mr Ong Pang Boon. He was responding to Member of Parliament Mr S Rajoo's call for the Government to consider setting up a "South East Asian Study and Research Centre".
Dr Goh Keng Swee, a prime mover behind the establishment of the Institute, had explained why he thought it was necessary and what he envisioned for ISEAS. He wrote: "It is necessary to say why we need such an Institute. In a sense, it may be said that the need is obvious, for our ignorance of Indonesia and her people is at once vast, comprehensive and frightening. We know more about Melbourne than Medan, more about the English Channel than the Sunda Straits. We know that General Nasution and Adam Malik are Bataks but we do not know what a Batak is, how many there are of them, where they live, and how is it that they produce two of the top leaders in Indonesia… the list of questions is interminable."
Dr Goh thought we needed to understand Indonesia and the region of South-East Asia better. As a small nation, Singapore needed to have some foresight of world and regional events so as to be able to deal with difficulties or gain advantage. ISEAS was to help us do this.
Today, the list of questions remains interminable. Indeed, even more so, as the world sees an unprecedented level of globalisation and flux. The region remains as puzzling – I suspect, even to ISEAS, even after nearly 50 years of study.
In 2014, Prime Minister Lee had announced the plans to rename ISEAS as the Yusof Ishak Institute, as one of the three ways to pay tribute to Encik Yusof Ishak, the other two being the naming of a new mosque in Woodlands and a Yusof Ishak Professorship in Social Sciences at NUS.
The renaming of the Institute recognises his contributions to Singapore as its first President. It also brings to the fore Singapore's deep roots in the region, in Southeast Asia. There is no question that Singapore's identity and heritage are rooted in the Southeast Asian archipelago, in the world known as "Nusantara". Because of these connections, a large part of our Singapore identity has to be connected to the region's indigenous traditions. It is, therefore, fitting that ISEAS be named after Encik Yusof Ishak.
Encik Yusof was born the oldest of nine children of a civil servant, Ishak Ahmad and descendant of the prominent Sumatran Malay Datuk Jannatun, who migrated to Penang in 1759. He received his primary education at Victoria Bridge School and later at Raffles Institution, where he was one of 13 students in the Queen's Scholarship class.
Soon after he left school, he joined the leading Malay newspaper of the time,
Warta Malaya
, and within a few years had risen to become its acting editor.
Encik Yusof had wanted a truly Malay newspaper that was by the Malays and for the Malays. In early 1938, together with some Malay leaders in Singapore, Encik Yusof established the Utusan Melayu Press Ltd, a newspaper dedicated to Malay issues, advocating for the community to modernise and focus on education. In 1957, Encik Yusof moved from Singapore to live in Kuala Lumpur, and resigned from the newspaper in 1959. He moved back to Singapore in the same year.
He became Singapore's President not long after. However, in 1968, Encik Yusof's health started to deteriorate and he was hospitalised for heart problems and other illnesses. While still in office, he died of heart failure in 23 November 1970, and was buried at the Kranji State Cemetery.
President Yusof Ishak was truly an outstanding man. It is not only his contributions as Singapore's first President that deserve respect; his dreams and vision for the Malay community and for Singapore society at large, his own work as one of Singapore's best and brightest sons, is deserving of our respect and appreciation. Madam, I support the Bill.
:Thank you, Mdm Speaker, for this opportunity to speak on the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (Amendment) Bill. I wholeheartedly welcome this amendment to name the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies as the "ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute". This change will bring the ISEAS Act into closer alignment with the legislation for other statutory boards under the purview of the Ministry of Education.
In our golden jubilee year, it is apt and timely to give this recognition to our first President, the late Encik Yusof Ishak.
The late President Yusof Ishak was an exemplary leader. Although he was a stout champion of Malay issues and interests, he was equally a strong advocate of multi-racialism and racial harmony. In his 1968 New Year message to Singaporeans, he said:
No man need feel that to belong to a particular religion puts him at a disadvantage or gives him an advantage. This is how things are in Singapore and this is how things must always be in our country. Only in this way can a multi-racial society like Singapore live in peace and prosperity.
Right after the 1964 racial riots, he went to great length to interact with people of all races to help restore trust and confidence among the different ethnic communities.
The late Encik Yusof Ishak's commitment to multi-racialism and racial harmony reminds us Singaporeans that while we are encouraged to further the progress of our own ethnic communities, we must rise above sectarian thinking, stand united as one people, and look to further our broader national interests together.
At this juncture, Mdm Speaker, please allow me to continue in Malay.
:The late President Yusof Ishak is a great role model for our youths. As an athlete in school, and then a journalist, and subsequently as the Head of State, he consistently showed the highest level of discipline and an unparalled dedication towards self-improvement.
Regardless of age or period of time, he had always given his best when performing his obligations – whether in education, career or family.
His eldest son, Dr Imran Yusof, previously shared that Encik Yusof Ishak gave his full focus and energy towards fulfilling his duties and obligations as the Head of State, yet at the same time, he never neglected his responsibilities towards his family.
His identity – as a defender of the community and also as a champion of a strong multi-racial society – is something that we should emulate. Just like him, as we continue to build and develop the Malay community, we should also champion the development and cohesiveness of a plural society in Singapore.
I hope that with the naming of this ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute, we can continue his legacy – which is our commitment to achieve excellence for self and community, racial harmony and cohesion, and also the development of the nation.
As the saying goes – A tiger dies and leaves behind its skin, a man departs and leaves behind his reputation. And may the name Yusof Ishak continue to inspire us, especially our youths.
For me, the move to change the name of this regional educational institute to the ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, bears an implicit reminder that we should not ignore. This move reminds us to never forget the struggles, the deeds and the contributions of the pioneer generation, and those who are older and more experienced than us, in building this society and nation.
Although everything comes and goes, let us not forget the values and identity of those who gave us a society and a nation that is strong is and one that we can be proud of.
We have inherited something really special, that is, this country that we love. Let us continue this effort and carry out our responsibility to build and develop this nation, with an indomitable spirit that can never be extinguished. As the saying goes – we must always uphold the traditions in the place where we live.
I support the Bill.
:Thank you, Mdm Speaker, I rise to support the Bill.
The Bill primarily seeks to honour our late President, Encik Yusof bin Ishak, by effecting the renaming of the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS) as the "ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute". Both ISEAS and Encik Yusof have played important roles in our development as a nation.
ISEAS was established as an autonomous research institute in 1968 – one of the first of its kind in the region. It aimed to contribute to a growing body of knowledge on issues related to Southeast Asia. Since then, with the many economic and political changes in the region, ISEAS has steadily extended its scope of study, and grown in repute.
Its research activities are wide-ranging. ISEAS publishes numerous reputable journals which are well recognised in the international academic community, and is also known for its in-depth analysis of issues through the books that it regularly publishes. With a wide collection of books and publications on Southeast Asia, its library serves as a valuable resource centre for scholars.
ISEAS also contributes to the promotion of Southeast Asian scholarship by promoting and hosting various fellowships and programmes that bring together both experienced, eminent researchers, as well as young scholars, to contribute to the body of research on the region.
Its outreach is not confined only to the scholarly community in the region, but also to the layman. ISEAS facilitates analysis and debate on key regional issues with those from the public and private sectors, to explore possible solutions for these issues and inform policy-making. It also reaches out to the public through public lectures and forums.
In the 1968 parliamentary debate on ISEAS's establishment, Members of Parliament had agreed on the importance of a higher level of understanding and cooperation between Southeast Asian countries, given that Singapore's survival would be closely linked to the state of affairs in the region. It was envisioned that ISEAS could be a centre for knowledge generation, building a community that would come together to cast light on issues in the region, and thus move toward finding solutions for these.
In an increasingly complex global environment, ISEAS's role continues to be important. Its efforts thus far have helped to establish a strong regional understanding; a foundation we can build on, as we continue to work to anticipate and preempt the issues facing our nation. ISEAS has made no small contribution to Singapore, and we are proud for it to bear Encik Yusof Ishak's name.
Mdm Speaker, allow me now to continue my speech in Malay.
:
In a speech delivered in Parliament in 1965, Encik Yusof shared his confidence in Singapore's potential. He said, "What we lack in land size and population, we more than make up for it through our strategic location and the quality of our people. With our dedication and determination, there is little to stop us from setting the pace of social transformation and economic development in the region."
Encik Yusof also believed in Singapore as a multi-racial and multi-religious society. His belief, however, was not limited to Singapore solely. During our National Day celebrations over 50 years ago, he shared the nation's hope that: "We in Singapore can make a contribution to political civilisation by proving that a multi-racial society can work. We can show, through our actions, how people of different races, languages and religions can work together to defeat the real enemies of the people – that is, poverty, ignorance, disease and the degradation of man by man. We can show how a rich variety of cultures, languages and religions can in fact enrich the life of a nation and yet unite the people… Singapore can be a role model and a source of inspiration to countries caught in the quagmire of racial intolerance and religious bigotry."
This is a Malay
pantun
or short poem that reflects his spirit. The
pantun
states that "one must go through difficulties and hardship in order to have a country that is visionary".
Encik Yusof envisioned that, in our struggle to find stability in diversity, Singapore could one day be a beacon to other nations. Encik Yusof did not just have intellectual wisdom, but was also well-attuned to the needs of the people of Singapore.
When he was selected to be the Yang di-Pertuan Negara, then-Prime Minister Mr Lee Kuan Yew said that Encik Yusof Ishak was "one amongst us whose deep understanding of the hopes and fears of our people, and whose natural dignity ensure that the duties of his high office will be discharged honourably and well"
Some eight years later, after Encik Yusof Ishak became President; many placed their confidence in his capacity to continue to represent Singapore as the Head of State. Members of Parliament spoke of the way in which he embodied the Singaporean spirit and character, the devotion and dignity in which he discharged his duties, and his ability to win the respect and confidence of the people.
This is another Malay
pantun
that shows Singaporeans acknowledging his contributions. It states that "it is written in history; about a pre-eminent leader who was held in high regard by everyone."
In short, throughout his time as the Head of State, Encik Yusof Ishak truly became the Head of the nation as a whole, not just in terms of the job title, but also by embodying the spirit of the job.
I sum up the tribute to him in this
pantun
. It states that "Yusof Ishak is an illustrious man. His deeds are never forgotten, his name will never fade away."
Looking at his contributions to our nation and his confidence about Singapore's future, and how we can preserve his services and contributions through the renaming of ISEAS, I feel that I should comment on what was said by Ms Sylvia Lim.
I think that it is not the right time, while we are giving the highest honour to a pre-eminent Singaporean − based on his contributions in the past − that we politicise this issue by questioning whether ISEAS will become a body that obeys the directions of the Government.
What the Government has done – by contributing and giving support to ISEAS – has created outcomes that are acknowledged internationally, and this will remain so even if the number of ISEAS members will be reduced, even if the organisations represented in ISEAS will no longer be represented by the same number of people as in the past.
I do not see this as the Government interfering in ISEAS' role as an eminent body that studies the issues and developments in Southeast Asia to understand this region as best as possible, so that we can formulate policies that are strong and good as a nation and as a member of the ASEAN community.
Hence, I feel quite hurt to hear Ms Sylvia Lim's comments, which I think that in my view, politicises a motion to put on record the name of our pre-eminent Singaporean when we renamed ISEAS.
Mdm Speaker, allow me to conclude now in English.
Mdm Speaker, allow me now to conclude in English. Indeed, Encik Yusof was a pre-eminent leader who played a crucial role in Singapore's difficult early years. He was a man with great foresight. When Encik Yusof first took on the role of Yang di-Pertuan Negara, the position carried with it little ready-made standing. As the Head of State of a young Singapore with little resources at its disposal, and still uncertain of its place in the region, Encik Yusof had to imbue in the position the dignity and honour he believed was due to Singapore.
This could not have been done by someone who did not firmly believe in Singapore and all that she could be. But Encik Yusof was someone with a vision to look beyond Singapore in her current state, and be certain of what she could achieve, despite the limitations. He believed that there was little to stop Singapore from setting the pace of social change and economic development in the region. He envisioned that Singapore's struggle to find stability in diversity could one day be a beacon to other nations – evidence that a multi-racial society works, and a source of inspiration to countries fighting against racial intolerance and religious bigotry.
We are proud of our early forefathers for their belief in Singapore – their belief that if we band together, if we learn together, and if we strive forward together, we will succeed despite the odds. And we did, thanks to them.
Men such as Encik Yusof Ishak, and institutions such as ISEAS, have given Singapore the critical capital needed to succeed. We are proud to honour both today in having ISEAS bear Encik Yusof Ishak's name. Thank you, Madam.
:
Ms Sylvia Lim.
:
Thank you, Madam. I would like to make a clarification. I am not sure why Senior Parliamentary Secretary Hawazi is hurt. If he listened to what I said, I said that we fully support the renaming of ISEAS as the "ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute". We have no issue with that at all. Our only issue is with clause 6 that changes the structure of the Board of Trustees.
:
Mdm Speaker, I did not dispute her support to this Bill. But I disputed her intent in politicising this matter.
:
Minister Heng Swee Keat.
: Mdm Speaker, I thank Mr Lim Biow Chuan, Mr Zaqy Mohamad, Prof Tan Tai Yong, Dr Intan Mokhtar and Mr Hawazi Daipi for their very sincere support and full-hearted support of the Bill. Their support stands testament to the significance of Encik Yusof's role in Singapore's success story.
Let me address the issues raised by Ms Sylvia Lim. Ms Lim was concerned about one clause about the appointment of the Board. Now, let me take you back in history. ISEAS, as the first research institute of its kind established in Singapore back in 1968, had various appointment authorities so that there was adequate representation from a range of interest groups and a range of people who could contribute.
Almost 50 years have passed, Ms Lim, and much has changed in that 50 years. For one, ISEAS, as I had said in my speech, established its network of relationships, established its scholarship, and has a very wide network of people, of experts, of professionals, of policy-makers, of key decision-makers, both in Singapore and in the region. So, ISEAS is now in a very different position than when it was first set up way back in 1968. And this was not by chance. This was by very conscious effort and hard work over these many years. And I hope that Ms Lim gives recognition to the effort that generations of researchers in ISEAS have given.
Second, Board size matters. Too big a Board does not function effectively. In fact, perhaps I should indicate that when I was in the Ministry of Education, as well as the Ministry of Trade and Industry and in the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS), I had on various occasions served on the Board of ISEAS, the East Asian Institute and the Institute of South Asian Studies. At the MAS, I was overseeing a major piece of work on the review of corporate governance of our companies and banks. I can assure you that if you are diligent in looking at how corporate governance works, there is almost a global consensus that Boards that are too big do not function effectively because the responsibilities get diluted and you may not necessarily get the right decision-makers.
So, I find it curious that Ms Lim would focus on this particular clause when there are also some other important clauses. Clauses 9 to 11 put in financial provisions on ISEAS. The financial provisions relate to the appointment of auditors and to the submission of financial statements. I hope that Ms Lim would agree with me that the proper audit of accounts and the timely submission of audited information are important. They are important aspects of accountability.
In fact, ISEAS has been very diligent over the years, that despite the fact that these provisions were not there, they have been very diligent in observing these practices. I think it is a good thing for us to institute them into the Act.
Let me also inform Ms Lim that in our statutory boards, in fact in most of our statutory boards in general, Members of the Boards are appointed by the Minister, partly for this very important reason that statutory boards draw resources from the Government, and it is important that there be proper accountability. I do not think that Ms Lim will disagree with me on that accountability, I hope?
In MOE, in fact, members of the Boards of our statutory boards, including our Polytechnics, ITE and so on, are appointed by the Minister. Has this in any way detracted from their ability to do good work? Not at all. On the contrary, we take great care, we take great care, in selecting the right people for the Board. We take corporate governance seriously, Ms Lim.
If you look at it in totality, this is a very important provision to improve corporate governance and to update the changes that have taken place over the years. And it is to take us forward, it is to make sure that ISEAS can take the next leap forward as we associate Encik Yusof's name with this important institute. I hope that Ms Lim does not see shadows when there are none.
And I hope that Ms Lim is not throwing out a red herring. It would not be very sincere to on one hand say the Workers' Party supports this Bill but also that the Workers' Party will vote against it if you have this clause. I fully understand Senior Parliamentary Secretary Hawazi's feeling that this is not the time for politicking. This is a very important piece of change to honour President Encik Yusof. So, let me continue.
Mdm Speaker, as we celebrate SG50 and remember Singapore's achievements and progress over the past 50 years, we commemorate those who have led the way. We must honour our early pioneers, their spirit, their ruggedness, and their unwavering commitment to forging a future for Singapore. More importantly, we must endeavour to stay on the good path that they have set as we journey forward together.
Unfortunate episodes of strife and unrest are rife around the world – it is all the more important for Singapore to navigate our way forward with care. We need to hold on to the spirit of togetherness forged by our forefathers, and the conviction that each of us plays a part in nation-building.
Let us continue to build bridges with our neighbours, at the personal and national levels. In Encik Yusof's words: "We in Singapore should not fall into the tragic error of viewing the variety of language, religion, culture and race as a stumbling block to progress and prosperity. On the contrary, if we approach these differences with goodwill, tolerance and healthy curiosity, this rich variety will ultimately turn out to be our salvation. It is this tolerance for variety, among other things, which today makes Singapore the dynamic and progressive city it is."
Naming a highly-regarded institution like ISEAS after Encik Yusof Ishak, is our way of thanking and honouring Encik Yusof for his service to Singapore, of committing ourselves anew to the principles of harmony and unity that he held dear, and of presenting to the world that we are proud of the legacy he had left us. To have had Encik Yusof as our Yang di-Pertuan Negara and the first President of Singapore is a cause of gratitude, pride, and inspiration. We hope that Singapore and ISEAS will continue to take Encik Yusof's convictions forward. May his name continue to call to remembrance his life's work, and his vision for Singapore.
It is my honour to bring this Bill before the House. I invite all Members not only to support this Bill, but to support it sincerely and to commit to living up to the principles and values of Encik Yusof Ishak.
:
Ms Sylvia Lim.
:Thank you, Madam. Madam, I have five clarifications for the Minister. First clarification is, does the Minister not agree that actually clause 6 is not just an update but it is actually a change, fundamental change in the way members are nominated to the Board? That is the first clarification.
Second clarification is that earlier, Prof Tan Tai Yong, as a member of the Board of ISEAS, mentioned how well things are going in ISEAS. So does the Minister disagree? Does he think that there is something wrong with the way ISEAS is currently being run?
Third, the Minister mentioned about Board size. Quite apart from Board size, is there a need for the clause to make the Minister the sole appointee of the entire Board? I think those are two different issues really.
Fourth clarification, does the Minister not agree that ISEAS is not just any statutory board? Looking at the origin of ISEAS as a multi-stakeholder institution, is he saying that that has changed?
And last of all, Mdm Speaker, just to clarify, if the Government removes clause 6, we will support the Bill.
: Mdm Speaker, let me take each of these questions in turn. First, as an update. As I said earlier on, I hope that, Ms Lim, you have heard me carefully, I said that much has changed in the last 50 years. And I think in whatever we do, we need to update provisions in the law to keep up with the changes. I explained at length how over the years, ISEAS had built up a very wide and deep network of relationships. What was done in the past where we needed various segments to support ISEAS' work, we now have many, many institutions and many, many groups who are in support of ISEAS' work.
Second, she mentioned that Prof Tan Tai Yong had mentioned how well ISEAS has been doing. And indeed, I fully agree with Prof Tan Tai Yong that ISEAS has been doing well. But I hope that Ms Lim believes in this principle that having done something well, we can always do it better. We can always do it better, and what we are trying to do is to streamline the Board so that the Board can be more effective in discharging its duty. Does Ms Lim not agree that we should always look for improvements in everything we do, whether we are running Town Councils or whether we are running the Government?
Third, in terms of the sole appointment authority, she asked about why it then becomes a sole appointer. In fact, as I had said, MOE takes appointments of our statutory boards' board members seriously. If not for that, we would not have so many people serving on our Board and contributing in so many different ways. And not just in MOE. In many of our statutory boards, as I had said, the Minister appoints the members of the Boards to the statutory boards. And great care is exercised in appointing members to the Board so that we have broad and appropriate representation.
Ms Lim says that ISEAS is not just any statutory board, it is a multi-stakeholder institute. I think, perhaps, Ms Lim under-estimates the amount of work that many statutory boards undertake to engage their stakeholders. Every Ministry, every statutory board, has multiple stakeholders. Every institute in our universities, every Polytechnic, ITE and so on, also have multiple stakeholders. Therefore, in that regard, ISEAS is not different from all the other statutory boards. Does the Institute of South Asian Studies not have multiple stakeholders? Does the East Asian Institute not have multiple stakeholders? Does the Institute of Strategic Studies not have multiple stakeholders? They all do. So, I hope that Ms Lim would not throw up a red herring.
And finally, she mentioned that if clause 6 is removed, she will support it. I really, really hope that she supports the renaming sincerely, wholeheartedly, like all the other Members who have spoken, that she does not throw up a red herring as a way of not supporting the Bill. It is your decision, Ms Lim. It is the decision of your party, but please do not throw up a red herring. Be sincere, be wholehearted in honouring Encik Yusof Ishak. That is all I ask of you.
:
Mr Low Thia Khiang.
:
Madam, clarification. We were wondering whether the Government is sincere in honouring Encik Yusof Ishak. Is it in disguise in honouring Encik Yusof Ishak by changing the name for controlling ISEAS by changing the appointment power of the Board? Because this makes me think of how eventually the Nanyang University was closed. The Board subsequently changed and closed.
:
Mr Low, I am so surprised and disappointed with what you have just said, given your many years in politics. I spent so much time in my speech talking about why ISEAS has been an important institute in Singapore over the years, why it will continue to play a major role in the years forward, that our understanding within Singapore as well as with our partners in the region is critical, is critical to our success in the future. Do we want ISEAS to succeed? Absolutely! So, why would I, as a Minister, make an amendment to the change in order to make ISEAS less effective? I hope that Mr Low does not start imagining things when there is none, and that is not good for governance.
:
Mr Faisal Manap.
:
Thank you, Madam, in Malay.
:
Madam, I would like to say again that the Workers' Party supports and fully agrees to the renaming of ISEAS to Yusof Ishak Institute because it is a noble effort to accord the highest honour to the spirit of Encik Yusof Ishak, that is very much treasured. But, Madam, I would like to get a clarification from the Minister. I would like to ask the Minister, as a matter of principle, is it not a contradiction when the effort to rename it to Encik Yusof Ishak institute - even though this is a good effort to honour a President – but at the same time, an effort is also made to change the powers of appointment from the President to the Minister? Thank you.
: I hope, again, that Mr Muhd Faisal Manap has listened carefully to what I have said for the last hour or so. I tried to explain as carefully as I can why these changes are important. In fact, I started by saying that the primary aim of this Amendment is to rename the institute in honour of Encik Yusof Ishak. At the same time, we really need to also update provisions. Updating of provisions in legislation is an on-going effort and I believe that every Member of this House will recognise that we always have to keep up with changes and to make sure that even when things are running well, we continue to improve and do better. Would you not agree that we should continue to do better?
I have also explained that I have gone through the Boards. I have served on the Boards of these various institutes. One personal experience I can tell you is what constitutes a good Board. Perhaps, Members of the Workers' Party would like to share their experience on some of these Boards, and if they can convince me that a big Board works effectively. Our experience has been that it needs a certain optimal size. Given the nature of the operations of ISEAS, we need an optimal Board size and we need to recognise that ISEAS has over the many years built up its relationship, many, many think tanks, research centres, stakeholders in Singapore, and so on and so forth. So, do not throw a red herring and then talk about this. What we are trying to do is also to improve governance so that we can take ISEAS even further.
:
Mr Low.
:
Madam, I would like to seek the Minister's clarification. Would he agree we relook at clause 7? I think it is a question of not so much of whether the Board is big or small, but a question of why you need the Minister to be the sole appointer. Can the Minister assure us that it is going to be diversified as what it used to be? And why is there a need to have a sole appointer? I think it fundamentally changes the character and the appointment of the Board. So, would he agree, and if he agrees to relook at the provision, the Workers' Party will support that.
: Mr Low, I hope that in this House we conduct our debates frankly, openly and honourably, that if the Workers' Party is sincere about supporting this Bill, then support it. Please do not throw a red herring. I have explained at great length why all the other statutory boards − in fact, most of the other statutory boards − have Board members who are appointed by the Minister. I have explained that in MOE, all the statutory boards under MOE, the members are appointed by the Minister. Has it detracted them from their performance? Has it changed their character? Not at all. In fact, it has made them effective.
Would you say that our institutions, under the Ministry, are not effective because our Boards did not have 25-30 members? I do not think you will come to such a conclusion, would you, Mr Low? So, I do really, really hope that you do not try and push this away.
I have also announced earlier on that it is the intention of the Government that the clauses come into effect on 12 August 2015, a month from now, on the 105th anniversary of Encik Yusof Ishak's birth, and in this very special SG50 year. I think it will be the honourable thing to do, and a very fitting way to honour Encik Yusof Ishak.
I am confident that many Singaporeans and, indeed, many Members of this House would endorse such a decision, and I hope that the Workers' Party acts honourably and sincerely and supports this wholeheartedly, and not throw up red herrings. It will be very disappointing, Mr Low.
:
Mr Low Thia Khiang.
: We have explained again and again that we are in support of the change of name to honour Encik Yusof Ishak. Our problem is that we cannot understand why there is a need to use this name change at the same time to change the appointment of the Board members. How does it square with honouring the President, and at the same time removing the President's power originally in the Act, to appoint the chairman and vice-chairman of the Board? We cannot square with that.
So, yes, while we wholeheartedly support the change of name to honour President Yusof Ishak but, at the same time, we cannot square with the change that is being "
tumpang
" in Malay, with the name change, that it is something which is not in accordance with the spirit of you wanting to change the name to honour the President.
: Mdm Speaker, I object to Mr Low saying that we are using the name change in order to change the composition of the Board. That is not our intention. Let me state categorically that is not our intention. I have also drawn your attention to the fact that there are also some other very important changes like, for example, financial provisions and why we included clauses on financial provisions. That we think that statutory boards that receive public funds should be held accountable, should appoint auditors, should submit audit information on time. So, those are part and parcel of the changes to update the governance of the Board, and it is important that in this governance, we continue to improve.
The fact that the Board of ISEAS is appointed by the President was something that was set up back in 1968 and, as I said, if you look at most of the other statutory boards, for the vast majority of them, the appointment is made by the Minister.
And as I have said – this must be my third, fourth, or fifth time of saying that to your Members – that in the Ministry of Education, all the statutory boards under the Ministry are appointed by the Minister. So, there is nothing untoward about it. There is nothing whatsoever that is untoward about it.
The more you speak, the more I feel that the Workers' Party has not been very sincere in its objection, and you have not been very sincere in saying that you support the Bill. You cannot say, on the one hand, that I support this to honour Encik Yusof Ishak and, on the other hand, you say, "Oh, I take objection to this." I tried very hard to explain what this is all about.
:
Mr Low Thia Khiang.
:
Does the Minister not agree that corporate governance has nothing to do with whether the Board member is appointed by the Minister? I think corporate governance is something that is expected. I mean for the Town Council, the members are not appointed by the Minister but I think we debated here on corporate governance. So, I do not understand. We are not objecting to the part about corporate governance. We are only objecting to the part of appointment power that is given solely to the Minister. So, how does appointment power and corporate governance has to link in that way?
:
Mdm Speaker, I hope that Mr Low Thia Khiang has not contradicted himself – corporate governance has nothing to do with whether they are appointed by the Minister. I hope I did not get you wrong, that corporate governance does not depend on whether the members are appointed by the Minister. Now, if that is the case, then, surely it does not matter whether they are appointed by the President, by the same logic.
: Well, Members, I think this clarification session has gone on long enough. And we are going around in circles. I will now put the question.
Question put, and agreed to.
:
Madam, the Workers' Party would like its objection put on record.
:
Yes, I take note of your objection and it would be placed on record.
:
Due to clause 6.
: I will take note of that, your objection to clause 6. I assume all Members of the Workers' Party want their objection to be recorded? [
Hon Members indicated agreement
.] Yes, it will be recorded. Can the Clerk now please read the title of the Bill.
Bill accordingly read a Second time and committed to a Committee of the whole House.
The House immediately resolved itself into a Committee on the Bill. - [Mr Heng Swee Keat].
Bill considered in Committee; reported without amendment.
:
Madam, the Workers' Party would like its objection to the Bill due to clause 6 recorded.
I take note of your objection. It will be recorded. Clerk, please proceed.
:
A point of Order, Mdm Speaker. Is there such a thing as an objection on that basis, and to have this kind of objection recorded in a vote? Either you vote for or you vote against the Bill. Which Standing Order, Madam, may I ask?
: The Standing Order allows for Members to record specific disagreement with specific clauses of the Bill. It does. So, it will be recorded that they have an objection to clause 6, and that will be recorded in the proceedings. Clerk, can you please proceed to read the title of the Bill?
Bill read a Third time and passed.
].
Adjourned accordingly at 5.05
pm
to a date to be fixed.
asked the Minister for Manpower (a) over the last three years, how many foreign domestic workers have been hospitalised and how many of them have hospitalisation bills exceeding $15,000; and (b) what can be done to encourage insurance companies to provide employers of foreign domestic workers with options to purchase medical insurance with higher medical benefits for their foreign domestic workers.
: Employers of foreign domestic workers (FDWs) are required to bear the cost of any medical treatment incurred by their FDWs so as not to transfer this cost to other taxpayers. To help employers meet this obligation, we make it compulsory for employers to buy medical insurance with a minimum cover of $15,000. Employers can voluntarily purchase higher insurance cover currently offered by insurance companies.
In the past three years, a total of 120 bills for day surgery and inpatient treatment incurred by FDWs at public hospitals, or about 2% of such bills, were above $15,000. This means that the current minimum cover of $15,000 is sufficient to fully cover 98% of day surgery and inpatient bills incurred by FDWs at public hospitals over this period.
asked the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs what is the protocol adopted in police investigations when the suspect can be suffering from disorders such as autism spectrum disorders or other psychological disorders, in order that an early assessment may be ordered prior to the suspect being charged in court so as to prevent a conviction prior to any such assessment especially in relation to young persons who can be suffering from such disorders.
: Police have prescribed procedures to handle suspects with intellectual disabilities or mental disorders so that necessary assistance can be rendered to them in the course of investigations.
Appropriate Adults Scheme (AAS in short) was introduced to assist vulnerable suspects, regardless of their age, with intellectual disabilities or mental disorders. The scheme was introduced progressively at Police Land Divisions since January 2015, and was fully implemented in May 2015. Under AAS, "Appropriate Adults" or support persons are provided to act as a bridge between Police and the vulnerable suspect to enable effective communication during Police’s interviews. Similar schemes can be found in jurisdictions such as the United Kingdom and Australia.
The AAs are recruited and managed by the Law Society. At present, there are 136 AAs and they comprise volunteers from voluntary welfare organisations (VWOs), special education teachers, caregivers and grassroots leaders. As of end June 2015, there were 41 activations of the AAs.
In determining whether to activate the AA, Police will ask the suspect or his next-of-kin to disclose any previous treatment for intellectual disabilities or mental disorders. Police will also check if the suspect is registered with the Developmental Disability Registry (DDR) administered by the National Council of Social Services. In addition, for suspects who do not have known medical records and are not registered with the relevant agencies, Police will make an assessment based on whether the suspect displays behaviour indicative of intellectual disabilities or mental disorders.
Upon the completion of its investigations, Police will submit its findings, including the relevant medical reports, to the Attorney General’s Chambers for its consideration. The Public Prosecutor has the final prosecutorial discretion on whether to charge the suspect in Court for each case.
asked the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs whether the Police will consider working more closely with other agencies to trace missing persons especially when the missing persons are diagnosed with dementia or other similar medical conditions.
: When Police receive a report on a missing person, investigations will be conducted to locate the person’s whereabouts. Police will interview the complainant to establish background facts pertaining to the missing person such as his mental health and the circumstances under which he was last seen.
Police will also disseminate lookout messages for the missing person to all police resources, especially those within the particular area where the missing person is reasonably believed to be in.
In particular, Police will accord priority to the follow up for various categories of missing persons who may be at higher risk. These include young children, elderly persons, persons with intellectual disabilities such as dementia and those missing under suspicious circumstances. In such cases, Police will mount a search operation if the person had only just gone missing or if there are leads to suggest where the missing persons might be.
In addition, Police already have established procedures in place to work with other Government agencies to locate missing persons. For example, Police will screen with other Government agencies, such as education institutions, hospitals and Ministry of Social and Family Development to trace and locate the missing person. Police may also issue appeals for information to seek the public’s assistance to locate them.
asked the Minister for Education whether the Ministry will consider extending subsidies under the MOE-Aided Dyslexia Association of Singapore Literacy Programme (MAP) to Singaporean children with dyslexia who are attending special education schools so as to ease the financial burden on their families.
: Over the years, a range of provisions targeted at language and literacy support, including dyslexia remediation, have been made available to students in mainstream and Government-funded Special Education (SPED) schools.
The MOE-Aided Dyslexia Association of Singapore Literacy Programme is one example and this Programme is specifically designed to meet the needs of mainstream school students with no other special educational needs. The financial assistance scheme for this Programme is thus provided only to eligible mainstream school students.
SPED schools have various programmes in place to provide customised literacy support for their students. For example, since 2011, MOE has worked closely with all SPED schools to implement the Direct Instruction (DI) Reading and Oral Language Programme to help students gain a stronger foundation in literacy. Another example is Pathlight School’s Literacy Remediation Programme (LRP) for their students with Autism Spectrum Disorder who are diagnosed with dyslexia or who are observed by their teachers to have reading challenges. Such customised literacy support programmes are offered at no additional cost to parents and are supported by Government’s per capita funding for SPED schools, which is substantially higher than that for mainstream schools as it takes into account the higher resourcing needs of SPED schools.
Moving forward, MOE will continue to work closely with SPED schools to support students who require customised literacy support.
asked the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance (a) what is the current number of persons with disabilities employed in the Civil Service and the percentage when computed against the current total employment number within the Civil Service; and (b) whether the Civil Service has specific plans to redesign jobs with a view to employing persons with disabilities.
30
asked the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance whether an inter-Ministry task force can be convened to actively identify and grant public sector contracts and jobs suitable for disabled and elderly citizens and to recognise the public agencies who will do so on a sustainable basis.
: The Public Service selects candidates based on their merit and job-fit through open and fair recruitment processes. Candidates, including persons with disabilities, are assessed holistically and the best person for the job will be offered the position.
As of 31 December 2014, there are about 150 persons with disabilities employed by Ministries and Statutory Boards. They constitute about 0.1% of the Public Service workforce.
In addition to the Public Service’s direct recruitment of persons with disabilities, the Ministry of Social and Family Development has also set up SG Enable, an agency that helps persons with disabilities to be independent and gain employment. SG Enable engages both public and private sector employers, provides job matching services, identifies and where appropriate, redesigns jobs for persons with disabilities. It also trains persons with disabilities to prepare them for work. Two of its recent successful referrals were to the Ministry of Social and Family Development and to the Ministry of Home Affairs. In addition, SG Enable provides training to colleagues of persons with disabilities and advice on appropriate workplace modifications. For example, screen magnification software can be used to help employees with visual impairment and height-adjustable tables can help employees in wheelchairs.
Whenever possible, public sector contracts have been awarded to support the employment of persons with disabilities. For example, Adrenalin, an events management company that provides training and employment opportunities for persons with disabilities, has several public agencies among its clients and organised events such as the President’s Challenge Social Enterprise Award ceremony. Public agencies have also, at different times, procured corporate gifts made by voluntary welfare organisations and persons with disabilities under Heartgifts initiative, led by the National Council of Social Service.
The public sector will continue to support and encourage the employment of persons with disabilities wherever possible, and welcomes suggestions on how it can do better.
For our mature workforce, the Public Service has since July 2011 taken the lead to offer re-employment to officers up to age 65 years. This was ahead of national legislation which took effect from January 2012. Since January 2015, the Public Service has further raised the re-employment age from 65 to 67 years, again ahead of nationwide implementation. There are now 1,887 public officers aged 65 and above, compared to 534 in 2010. This is a three-fold increase over four years and we expect the number to grow further.
asked the Minister for Trade and Industry (a) whether he can provide a breakdown of the projects undertaken under SPRING Singapore's Partnerships for Capability Transformation (PACT) programme by industry sectors; and (b) whether more efforts will be channelled towards expanding PACT in the services sector.
: The Partnership for Capability Transformation (PACT) programme was expanded in Budget 2013. Under the programme, EDB and SPRING Singapore support partnerships organisations
1
(LOs) and SMEs from the manufacturing and services sectors. SMEs can benefit through the upgrading of their capabilities by being suppliers to LOs. They can also work together on joint innovation projects. In total, $60 million has been committed to the PACT programme from FY13 to FY15.
Since 2013, SPRING Singapore has supported 14 PACT projects and 461 SMEs in the services sector. In the manufacturing sector, the programme has benefitted 167 SMEs and 78 PACT projects.
asked the Minister for Manpower since the beginning of 2015 (a) how many unemployed Singaporean workers gave up looking for work; and (b) how this figure compares with the same period in 2014.
: The proportion of discouraged workers among the citizen labour force had remained low at 0.5% in 2013 and 2014
2
. These are individuals who were not actively looking for a job because they believed their job search would not yield results. 2014 is the latest data that is available.
asked the Minister for National Development whether there can be a policy for residents to be consulted and a poll taken when there is to be a conversion of HDB void deck spaces for the specific uses of voluntary welfare organisations, grassroot organisations, town councils and constituency offices.
: HDB blocks are built with void decks as a deliberate part of their design and are common space to serve the interests and needs of the neighbourhood. The void deck for instance serves as potential space for use to set up social and communal facilities benefitting the community. These include child care centres, senior care centres as well as resident centres.
The supervising agency will assess the need for the facility, with input obtained from residents in the neighbourhood, grassroots leaders and the local Advisor through house-to-house visits, surveys and community events like block parties. The feedback collected are considered and evaluated carefully against the assessment of the most suitable locations in the context of the whole neighbourhood or precinct before a decision is made whether to proceed. As the community facilities are meant to serve residents in the area beyond just any single block, it is not practical to conduct formal polls only among residents living in the block where a facility is to be located.
Town Councils’ offices support the Town Councils’ functions of managing and maintaining the estates. They may be located at HDB void decks if there are no suitable commercial premises available. Currently, Constituency Offices are not located at HDB void decks but at the Community Centres/Clubs.
asked the Minister for Defence (a) what is the current ratio of psychiatrists and case managers to national servicemen (per 100 servicemen) respectively; and (b) since 2005, how many national servicemen have been exempted from their NS duties because of mental health disorders.
: Over the last 10 years, about 400 pre-enlistees with severe mental health disorders have been exempted from NS annually.
The SAF has a team of over 1,200 psychiatrists, counsellors, para-counsellors and psychologists who deal with issues related to mental health. The ratio of psychiatrists within the SAF is more than twice that of the national population. In addition, the SAF draws upon the resources in our national healthcare system, including the Institute of Mental Health and psychiatric departments in restructured hospitals.
In consultation with the SAF Psychiatry Specialist Advisory Board, comprising senior psychiatrists from public hospitals, we will ensure that our national servicemen receive good care during NS.
asked the Minister for Defence (a) what has been the general feedback on the recently implemented changes to the Individual Physical Proficiency Test (IPPT); and (b) how confident is the Ministry that this new IPPT will better test the physical readiness of full-time national servicemen and operationally-ready national servicemen to carry out their combat vocational roles.
: The feedback from national servicemen to the new Individual Physical Proficiency Test (IPPT) format has been positive. More than 90% of national servicemen polled believe the new IPPT format would be more convenient to train for. Since implementation on 1 April 2015, over 95% of NSmen who attempted the IPPT have opted for the three-station test format. The points system of the new IPPT format was designed to encourage national servicemen to achieve their best for each station. National servicemen who took the new IPPT showed an average improvement of five sit-ups for the sit-up station, and an average improvement of 21 seconds for the 2.4km run. For the recently introduced push-ups, 73% of national servicemen achieved average and above performance.
These findings indicate that the change in format has motivated our national servicemen to take greater ownership of their physical fitness and improved their performance.
The IPPT provides a uniform test to measure the basic fitness levels of all national servicemen. The SAF ensures that national servicemen keep physically fit and the IPPT complements our current combat fitness programme. For combat effectiveness, the SAF has introduced programmes to achieve its goals for various vocations. For instance, the Commandos have a customised combat fitness programme which includes vocation-related exercises, long route marches and combat obstacle course training. These courses condition the Commandos to meet their demanding combat roles.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources (a) whether Singapore's mean daily temperature may increase by as much as 4.6 degrees Celsius by the end of the century; and (b) what measures has Singapore taken to attempt to achieve international consensus on taking concrete steps to reduce the rate of global warming.
: The results from Phase 1 of our Second National Climate Change Study, which concluded in early 2015, projected mean temperatures across Singapore to increase by 1.4°C to 4.6°C by the end of the century depending on the level of future greenhouse gas emissions (see schematic below). Without mitigation actions, mean temperatures could increase to 32.0°C. These findings are consistent with the global projections from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Report (AR5)
3
. The actual extent to which these temperature increases are realised in Singapore will depend on how successful global mitigation actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are.
A global challenge such as climate change is best addressed on a multilateral basis. We therefore strongly support the multilateral negotiations taking place under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), where a new global agreement on climate change is set to be adopted at the 21st Session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention (COP-21) in December 2015 in Paris. Singapore is participating actively in the preparatory conferences and related events of the COP-21. We have consistently tried to play the role of a constructive bridge-builder and have been invited to facilitate numerous discussions at past climate conferences.
This year, we are deeply committed to achieving a meaningful agreement in Paris. It is our foremost priority that the agreement be an inclusive one that enjoys universal participation by all countries, in light of each country’s national circumstances and responsibilities. To achieve this, the international community must come together and demonstrate the political will to arrive at a consensus.
Singapore submitted its mitigation pledge, known as the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC), on 3 July 2015, well in advance of the Paris Conference. We hope that our submission will encourage more countries, especially those in our region, to come forward with their pledges too. This is important because these pledges, taken over successive cycles, will form the centre piece of global mitigation efforts under the agreement. No single country can solve climate change alone - all countries have a part to play.
asked the Minister for Social and Family Development how will the demand for childcare places be met in mature estates under the Remaking Our Heartland programme where they are substantially built up and there is less flexibility to build new facilities due to limited land.
: The Early Childhood Development Agency (ECDA) monitors the existing and projected demand for childcare in each estate, including mature estates.
Should the need to expand capacity arise in a mature estate, ECDA may work with HDB and childcare operators to build extensions to existing childcare centres within the estate. ECDA may also source for alternative sites such as retail malls, commercial buildings, and co-location with other community facilities.
As for new Build-To-Order (BTO) developments in mature estates, ECDA typically works with HDB to pre-build childcare facilities within the new development if there is anticipated demand.
asked the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth when will the Community Disputes Resolution Tribunals be set up and made operational.
: The Community Disputes Resolution Bill was passed in Parliament on 13 March 2015. It was mentioned that the Community Disputes Resolution Tribunals would be ready in the second half of the year. This is developing according to plan. The implementation details and the subsidiary legislation, such as the Rules of Court, are currently being worked out by the relevant agencies. We expect the Community Disputes Resolution Tribunals to be ready by end October 2015.
