asked
the Minister for Health whether hospitals administer different drugs and treatment for the same medical conditions based on private or subsidised wards and, if so, whether the Ministry conducts checks on hospitals for such practices.
(for the Minister for Health)
: In our public hospitals, care is provided based on the patients' clinical condition, rather than their subsidy status. Doctors and the health care team administer drugs and treatments appropriate to each patient's clinical needs. Where clinically appropriate to do so, generic drugs are used for both subsidised and private patients. However, as each patient has his own risk factors, clinical presentations and associated diseases, there may be differences in the treatment and drugs used for different patients, even for the same condition.
Some of the drugs or treatments thus prescribed could be non-subsidised as there are more cost effective alternatives available. Nonetheless, where non-subsidised drugs or treatments are assessed to be clinically required and cannot be replaced by subsidised alternatives, patients from lower-income households are provided assistance to help them access these drugs or treatments.
Public hospitals have various governance frameworks in place to ensure that patients receive care appropriate to their clinical needs. This includes accreditation committees to ensure appropriate use of new technologies and procedures, and that procedures are performed by properly trained doctors. The Pharmacy and Therapeutic (P&T) and Medical Device (MDC) committees ensure clinically appropriate use of drugs and medical devices/ implants respectively. There are also pre-operations conferences for peer review of elective surgeries to ensure that they are appropriate, safe and not unnecessary.
:
I had a recent case with my member who went to a hospital to do a stomach operation. There is a range of painkillers. The nurse gave him Panadol. He said, "I just did a stomach operation. Is there any way I can get an injection?" The doctor and the nurse were talking, and he over-heard the conversation: "C Class ward; Panadol is enough." This gave him a feeling that you would get subsidised treatment when you are in a C Class ward. Is there any way we can talk to the hospitals and see how they communicate and how do they make things straight. That is my only concern.
: First, let me thank the Member for raising this Parliamentary Question (PQ), as well as for sharing this example. I think it is important for us to explain and clarify. Let me re-assure the Member that hospitals do not differentiate the treatment routes based on the subsidy status of the patients, as long as the treatment route is required and necessary.
For this instance, it is indeed unfortunate that there is this perception. We need to get more details to better understand the case. Let me briefly elaborate. There are clinical guidelines for pain management in different clinical conditions, which provide clinical guidance on the choice of pain relief drugs and these are in line with international practices.
Typically, for pain management, as the Member has highlighted, clinical guidelines may give guidance to provide baseline pain management; further pain drugs may be added, if required; as well as to start with the least invasive drugs. This approach is quite typical across the different clinical conditions. The patient may first be prescribed oral Panadol. This could progress to stronger, more potent drugs, through injections, for instance. These are not without side effects.
Basically, throughout the spectrum of drugs required for pain management, you can find subsidised drugs. So, the patient does not really have to pay more for these subsidised drugs. There is no Panadol injection, but as the Member has mentioned, there are more morphine, pethidine, nico injections which are in the Standard Drugs List. As I have said, they are stronger painkiller and they may not be without their side effects, so we need to ascertain if the patient's conditions will warrant these, and if these are suitable for the patient. We would need further details to better understand the case.
What I would like to reiterate is that the drug and treatment prescribed is what the doctor and the healthcare team deem as clinically appropriate, based on the patient's conditions and not based on the subsidy status of the patient.
asked
the Minister for Health in respect of the latest statistics by the National Registry of Diseases that a disproportionate number of diabetics and patients with kidney failure, heart attacks and strokes come from the Malay population (a) whether the Ministry has plans to address the issue with the Malay community; and (b) whether the Ministry has conducted specific research on the causes and devised strategies to address them accordingly.
(for the Minister for Health)
:Mdm Speaker, there are ethnic differences in the rates of non-communicable diseases in Singapore. While Chinese had the highest incidence of cancer, Malays had the highest incidence of kidney failure, heart attacks and stroke in 2013. These non-communicable diseases all have common lifestyle risk factors such as obesity, smoking, unhealthy diet, a lack of sufficient physical activity, high blood pressure and high cholesterol. However, the impact of these risk factors can be reduced through the adoption of a healthier lifestyle, including having a balanced diet, sufficient physical activity, not smoking, and going for regular health screening.
MOH and the Health Promotion Board (HPB) have a variety of preventive health programmes and activities targeted at the general population, including children, adolescents, adults, and the elderly, to keep Singaporeans healthy and free of illness and disability for as long as possible through the adoption and maintenance of healthy lifestyle habits. To further encourage positive behavioural change, we launched the Healthy Living Masterplan in 2014, which aims to make healthy living accessible, natural, and effortless for all Singaporeans.
While rolling out population-based programmes to all Singaporeans, HPB has, over the years, tailored programmes specific to the cultural context of the various ethnic groups. Take for example, the Holistic Women's Health Workshop Series, which aims to empower women to take charge of their own and families' health over a range of health topics. This series of workshops are not only conducted in English, but also contextualised for the Chinese and Malay speaking audiences.
Since 2012, HPB has been partnering Majlis Ugama Islam Singapura (MUIS) and mosques in the Ramadan I Quit smoking cessation programmes. In 2014, of the 1,507 participants, one in five quit smoking, and another one in four reduced the number of cigarettes they smoked.
In 2013, HPB partnered the Singapore Muslim Women's Association (Persatuan Pemudi Islam Singapura or PPIS) and mosques to launch the 2014 Health calendar for Malay women. Serving as a healthy living educational tool, the calendar incorporates healthy recipes, health tips and screening messages to help users make healthier choices for themselves and their families. The response was positive, and we have increased the distribution of the 2015 calendar tenfold, to 30,000 households. In fact, this initiative has proven so popular, we have just launched a Chinese version of this calendar for the Chinese community, too.
Such initiatives and programmes are guided by the data and research that MOH and HPB conduct on the population, such as the National Health Survey, National Health Surveillance Survey and National Nutrition Survey. These surveys gather quantitative data on the health behaviour of the community, and are complemented by on-going qualitative feedback processes for further fine-tuning of programmes.
My Ministry continuously reviews our research methodology to ensure that we have the latest data on the health status of the population. We will also continue to incorporate best practices and research findings from other countries where relevant, and update our health prevention programmes and strategies tailored to the local context, including the Malay community.
: Mdm Speaker, I would like to thank the Parliamentary Secretary for his reply. Two clarifications. First, in profiling the Malay community as being more prone to certain sorts of diseases, have these co-relations been identified through studies of profiles of the population or is it more genetics? I am just wondering if more in-depth research has been done.
Two, in terms of outreach, it is great to see outreach such as quit smoking campaigns being done in the mosques. The number of people been reached out to is about 5,000, and the Parliamentary Secretary mentioned that one fifth had quit smoking, for example. This is good outreach but I think the numbers are still a bit small. There are also many other diseases that need to be managed as well. Is the Ministry considering more of such outreach or more of such collaborations in the community to address the other health issues?
: I want to thank the Member for the supplementary questions. As I had mentioned earlier, all the non-communicable diseases have common lifestyle risk factors, which are linked very directly to obesity, the food that we eat, as well as the lack of sufficient physical activity. These affect diseases like high blood pressure and high cholesterol. Essentially, what we have been trying to do is encourage people to eat moderately, a balanced diet, to have physical activities and go for health screening.
It is important that we embark on this. At the same time, we have noticed that different ethnic groups have different lifestyles. Even though all of us eat, Malays have their common way of eating and the dishes that they like. Similarly for the Chinese and the others.
We have moved into a targeted approach, which I had shared earlier. The calendar is very popular this year. We not only give aspects of the calendar, but we also relate to their lifestyle, in terms of the food that they cook and their common habits, so that we can reach out to the different sectors of the community. We realised that over time they become excited about how to live healthily. With that aspect, we want to focus on these lifestyle factors.
Beyond that, in terms of genetics, we do not have significant evidence to show such a phenomenon. Based on what we have, and what research we have done locally, we realise that such lifestyle practices play an important role. And we can reduce the risk to such non-communicable diseases among the community if we focussed on the aspects of healthy eating, physical activity as well as go for proper and appropriate health screening.
With regards to outreach, you will see that over time, we have been able to reach out to more and more Singaporeans in terms of the programmes that we have. For example, the calendar, we have increased it tremendously in terms of numbers. When we did it last year, we received many requests from the community, asking for more. I gave out more publicity materials than what I gave out last year. Demand has gone up so much, I had to ask for more materials.
Secondly, if you look at the anti-smoking campaign, "I Quit" programme, you would realise that the numbers not only have gone up, the number of families coming on-board to be part of this process of their family members has also gone up. I was there at last few years to share the load and to reach out to the community. I was so touched by the community support. Not only among the children and spouses, but also among grandparents coming to support to get their children to quit smoking.
Beyond these figures, anecdotally, I feel that there has also been an increase in terms of awareness about healthy living. For example, locally in my area, over two years, the number of Malays coming on board to be part of an exercise group which I join often, in fact, the numbers have gone up by three times. I just met them recently and I am so happy because I used to ask how many would need a calendar. In the past, it was about 10 to 15. This year, about close to 40 to 50 asked for it. When I went down, I met them. There was a sense of passion, commitment towards healthy living.
Also, you see more stakeholders coming together to be part of it. For example, we have the
Geng Sihat
over the last weekend, where Mdm Speaker was also part of this process to reach out to the community.
We are beginning to see more and more small pockets of those in the Malay/Muslim community coming together to reach out, to live healthily and at the same time create an atmosphere that healthy living is the right thing to do.
I would like to assure the Member that we would continue this effort. We feel that it is important for the community to be healthy and this will help the community to achieve better life in Singapore.
asked
the Minister for National Development (a) how many HDB flats have been compulsorily acquired in the past three years; (b) what are the main reasons behind the compulsory acquisition of these HDB flats; (c) what are the alternative accommodation provided to families affected by the compulsory acquisition; and (d) what measures are in place to enable these families to own HDB flats again.
(for the Minister for National Development)
: Mdm Speaker, for the three-year period from January 2012 to December 2014, HDB compulsorily acquired 202 flats. HDB takes Compulsory Acquisition (CA) action against flat lessees who have committed major lease infringements such as the unauthorised subletting of flats. Compulsory Acquisition (CA) action is also taken, as a last resort, against HDB mortgagors who persistently refuse to resolve their arrears, or work towards a sustainable solution, despite the assistance given.
HDB will assist households affected by CA due to mortgage arrears to find alternative accommodation. For those who can afford smaller flats, HDB will help them buy one and may offer them another loan for the purchase, if necessary. Those who are unable to afford another flat, and have no family support or other housing option, are allocated rental flats.
:
I thank the Minister of State. I have three supplementary questions. First, after how many months of mortgage arrears will HDB start the process of CA? Second, how does HDB help homeowners manage their arrears; and third, could HDB consider assisting homeowners with alternative accommodation even if they decide to sell their flats on their own instead of through CA?
: Mdm Speaker, it is not in the interest of HDB flat owners to accumulate mortgage arrears. It is not just a heavy financial burden on them but also tremendous emotional strain. HDB, therefore, intervenes early, proactively and sympathetically to help flat owners resolve their arrears issues.
There are many measures that can be taken to help these HDB homeowners. Some are short term, to deal with the short-term financial difficulties. Some are longer term for those facing prolonged difficulties. For instance, loan instalments are usually paid on the first of each month but HDB gives lessees up to the end of the month if they face temporary cash flow difficulties. But if they still face problems doing so, HDB will make a call, arrange a meet-up or even do a home visit, to better understand the situation and to offer help. The Member may note that every HDB branch has housing counsellors that offer financial counselling and explore sustainable housing options for homeowners in mortgage arrears.
What are some of these options? First, HDB can help the flat owner reschedule his mortgage loan, including extending the repayment up to the maximum loan period, if that would help.
Second, under the reduced repayment scheme, owners in difficulty can pay lower monthly instalments of between, let say, 50% and 75% of their normal instalments for, say, up to two years.
Third, they can defer their mortgage payments if they face serious financial difficulties. This will be for an initial six-month period. It can be extended based on review.
Fourth, homeowners can pay their arrears by instalments.
Fifth, they could sublet a spare room if there is one to generate additional income for themselves.
Sixth, they can also include their working adult children to help pay the loan without affecting their children's eligibility to apply for HDB loans in future.
Seventh, apart from financial measures, we also recognise that mortgage arrears are normally a symptom of other difficulties that the owners face. For instance, medical problems, medical or family issues, loss of job, loss of a loved one and the breadwinner, and so on.
HDB's counsellors, therefore, look beyond housing loan measures that I have just detailed above, and work with other agencies to help these families more holistically. These include Family Service Centres for family counselling; e2i, WDA or the CDC for job placement or job upgrading; the SSO for financial assistance; VWOs and so on.
Eighth, for those who are still unable to manage, as I said earlier, HDB will help them right size to the flat that they can afford and offer another housing loan to assist them, if necessary.
Ninth, if they cannot afford another flat, then HDB will allocate them a rental flat.
From January 2012 to December 2014, HDB has assisted 9,752 families with one or more the measures that I have just described above. It is only when all these attempts to solve their arrears problem fail, such as when the homeowners persistently refuse to solve their arrears or work towards a sustainable solution, that HDB has no choice but to exercise Compulsory Acquisition.
Well, the Member has asked, what is the time frame. Under the legislation, Compulsory Acquisition can be taken if arrears pile up for up to three months but in practice, HDB works with lessees, as I have just mentioned above, and this can take quite some time. It is an on-going process.
:
I wish to ask the Minister of State once the date of Compulsory Acquisition has been firmed up, is there a formal written notice sent to the lessee? That is one. The second is, how long is this period of notification on notice period?
: Mdm Speaker, yes, the HDB issues a Notice of Intention to compulsory acquire the flat, and down the line after all measures have failed, in addition to what I have just detailed above, a revesting notice is issued. Between the Notice of Intention and the actual acquisition, if HDB does need to resort to that, it can be many months, even up to a year or beyond. That is a reflection of the effort that HDB officers put in to try resolve the issues with the families directly.
:  I thank the Minister of State for the clarification earlier. I just want to move slightly onto a different note. I know most times we have been sympathetic and I credit HDB for being sympathetic for a lot of compassionate cases out there. But in my estate, for example, we have a lot of middle income families, and most times we look at right sizing and when they go into arrears, it is really about credit card debts and other sort of debts.
HDB has not mentioned one of those as a criteria that you consider but most of the times, when they right size, the cash that they get is also used to pay for a lot of these debts. What is HDB's view on this because many a time, when they want to right size, you take into account all these cash surpluses that you get as part of the settlement. I think for many of them, they also get stuck in trying to get a new flat or to right size. So, what is HDB's view on credit card debts and other forms of debts?
: An HDB flat is a home and HDB does not encourage people to monetise the flats then use it to settle debts, leaving themselves without shelter. Having said that, we recognise the realities and difficulties of life. Families may choose to settle all these debts to the detriment of their housing needs. It is, therefore, as I said in my answer earlier, that in the last resort HDB offers public rental housing or interim rental housing as these families take time to sort out the various issues.
I also said earlier, in my response to the Member Zainal's supplementary question, that HDB counsellors look beyond just arrears management and work holistically across the board with various agencies to tackle these issues such as credit cards, money lenders, social assistance, healthcare, and do their best to sort out these issues holistically.
asked
the Minister for National Development (a) what implication does HDB's net deficit of $1.97 billion in FY13/14 have for Singapore; and (b) whether this deficit trend will escalate in the future years.
:Madam, HDB's deficit is the outcome of Government policies to provide Singaporeans with good, affordable public housing and quality living environments in HDB towns.
HDB's deficit is largely due to the subsidy extended to buyers of new flats and the disbursement of CPF housing grants to eligible buyers of resale flats.
The spike in HDB's deficit in Financial Year 2013 was due to HDB's ramp-up in its flat-building and upgrading programmes. The deficit will remain high in the next few years, as flats launched in the ramp-up phase are progressively completed and handed over.
For future years, the deficit level will depend on several factors such as housing demand, policy changes, HDB's building and upgrading programmes, as well as development costs. HDB will continue to use its allocated resources judiciously to provide affordable and quality homes for Singaporeans.
: Madam, I thank the Minister for his response. I have two short supplementary questions for the Minister. I would like to ask the Minister how HDB financials would be impacted by other HDB initiatives, such as the Home Improvement Programme where the Government subsides up to 95% of the upgrading cost. And I understand there are plans to ramp up this initiative covering about 100,000 flats in the next two years?
Second, I would like to ask the Minister did he expect the deficit of $1.97 billion as part of the budget process from committed projects. How much of the deficit was anticipated and how much was due to cost overrun? And how the Government covers the deficits that HDB incur? Thank you.
: Madam, indeed, other HDB initiatives like HIP will contribute to the deficit of HDB. But the single big ticket item in our deficit is the subsidy and housing grants under the Home Ownership Programme. For upgrading, as we ramp up some programmes, there are other upgrading programmes which we are ramping down, for example, LUP which is a big $5-billion project.
How do we finance it? HDB operates under what we call the Deficit Financing Model. So, whatever is the deficit for the year, we receive a grant from MOF, so that in the end, we will balance our account. That grant is reflected in the overall Government Budget for the year, which we debate during COS.
Was the almost $2-billion deficit expected? Yes, it was expected because as we ramp up the numbers – 25,000 homes -- you should expect that the deficit will grow accordingly. But going forward I do not see us building 25,000 units per year for a long time. In fact, this is already Year Four, and we have started the process of tapering it down for the simple reason that the number of family formations is not of that order. While I hope even more Singaporeans will get married and have larger number of babies, I do not see that happening in the near future or the medium term.
asked
the Minister for National Development (a) what has been the number of events held at the Speakers' Corner for the past one year; (b) how does this compare with the year before and the year that it was started; and (c) whether there is a need to review regulations over the use of Hong Lim Park.
:Last year, there were 136 registrations of events in the Speakers' Corner. The corresponding figure for 2013 was 169.
NParks took over the administration of the Speakers' Corner from September 2008. For the whole of 2009, the corresponding figure was 129.
The regulations governing the use of Hong Lim Park have worked well over the years with no untoward cases until the incident of 27 September last year. As legal proceedings against certain persons related to the incident are still on-going, it is not appropriate to comment on whether there is a need to review the regulations over the use of Hong Lim Park.
asked
the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources (a) if he will give an update on PUB's action plan to strengthen Singapore's flood resilience; (b) whether the action plan that covers the entire spectrum of drainage and flood management has worked or not; and (c) whether it needs further enhancement in the larger context of long-term plans in view of the global climate change.
: Mdm Speaker, the increasing frequency of high-intensity storms as well as the progressive urbanisation of our landscape has posed challenges for the management of flooding in Singapore.
My colleagues in PUB have been very busy over the last few years, and PUB adopts a comprehensive "source-pathway-receptor" approach to preventing and mitigating floods. This involves measures, first, to reduce the storm water run-off, that is at the source itself where the rain falls; second, to enhance drainage capacity, that is to increase the flow within the drains; and, third, to reduce the flood risks at vulnerable low-lying areas.
Since 2011, our drainage design standards have been changed and they have been raised by between 15% and 50%, depending on the size of the catchment. PUB has, therefore, been carrying out an island-wide drainage improvement programme to enhance the capacity of all our canals and drains to meet these new standards. That is why many of you would have noticed that there is a lot more work going on in drains – I am sure, even in your own local neighbourhoods over the last three years.
In fact, since 2012, drainage improvement works in 187 locations have been completed. On-going currently is work in another 115 locations, including the Stamford Detention Tank, the Stamford Diversion Canal and the Bukit Timah First Diversion Canal. This year, drainage improvement works in an additional 19 areas will also commence, and these include improvement works to Tampines Canal to alleviate flood risks along Tampines Road itself as well as new drainage infrastructure at Marina South to serve upcoming developments in that area.
To reduce run-off at the "source", all new developments or re-developments of 0.2 hectares or more since January 2014 have had to control the peak run-off entering the public drainage system. Developments can achieve this by implementing on-site detention or retention measures in order to reduce the peak run-off, which means when the rain falls, it does not immediately enter the public drainage system. To date, about 75 developments have submitted plans that have incorporated such on-site features.
At the "receptor" level, PUB has raised the requirement levels for platform and crest levels for all new developments and re-developments since 2011. This is to provide an additional safeguard against future sea level rises. PUB has also been working with specific building owners to provide technical advice on relevant receptor solutions such as flood barriers and road crests where necessary.
In addition to all these structural enhancements, PUB has also instituted measures to help the public better prepare for floods. PUB has a network of 171 water sensors installed in all the major drains and 161 Closed Circuit Televisions (CCTVs) installed at flood prone areas in order to provide remote monitoring of drain and flood conditions at critical junctions. All this data is available publicly in real time. If you use any of the apps from my Ministry, you will be able to see the video feeds in real time. The drain sensors are tweeted in real time also, if the water levels reach significant points.
Since August 2011, PUB has also instituted a free SMS alert system to provide early warnings of heavy rain and rising water levels in canals to members of the public who subscribe to this free service.
Our approach to flood management and to tackling storm water at the source, pathways and receptors, has served us well over the last few years. It is too early to declare victory but we have made progress, and I would say my colleagues are cautiously optimistic. We will continue to work hard, and over time, the results will speak for themselves. Thank you, Mdm Speaker.
:
Mdm Speaker, I thank the Minister for his cautiously optimistic answer, and for the hard work by the PUB. And, really, this time round, we did not suffer any flooding in the Orchard Road area, not even ponding. May I ask whether there are other initiatives besides the recommendations by the expert panel recommended in 2012?
: We have substantially implemented all the recommendations that were put up by the expert panel. We are actually projecting a future with even greater challenges. As global climate change occurs, we anticipate further rises in the sea levels. We also anticipate more intense storms. So, even the levels of drainage standards we have imposed now may not be adequate for the future. So, this is an on-going programme. Members will also appreciate that these are major works, they are expensive works, they are disruptive. So, we have got to pace them out and ensure that we do not unnecessarily disrupt lives or spend too much money in advance of those needs. So, there is an element of judgement needed.
I will just give you a figure, so that you can get an idea of it. If you go back to the 1970s, Singapore had about 3,200 hectares of low-lying flood-prone areas. Today, the flood-prone area has been reduced to about 34 hectares. Three thousand two hundred hectares to 34 hectares. But to reduce 34 hectares to an even smaller number, it is like ascending the last bit of the mountain. It will get progressively more difficult. But we make this commitment that we will be open, and we will acknowledge problems. That is part of the reason for our tweets on drains, that is to send a message to the people that we will not ignore problems, we will be completely open and forthright about them.
The other point is that we have a simple heuristic within PUB. If an area has had a flood, we will conduct a full investigation, identify the source, if need be, upgrade the drain. You will see continuous improvement. If any of you have got any specific concerns in your respective areas, please let us know.
asked
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance whether the availability of corporate retirement plans will be widened, given the low level of such plans in Singapore which contributes to Singapore's low score on retirement adequacy in the Mercer Melbourne Global Pension Index.
(for the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance)
:Mdm Speaker, Mr Yee has asked about the relative absence of corporate retirement plans, which he believes has contributed to a low score for Singapore in the Mercer Melbourne Global Pension Index.
Madam, in this study, Singapore was ranked overall ahead of other Asian countries as well as developed countries such as Germany and the US. Mercer described our system as one with "a sound structure, with many good features, but has some areas for improvement."
Given that employers in Singapore make mandatory contributions to their local employees' Central Provident Fund (CPF) savings, the observation in the study about corporate retirement plans is relevant mainly to foreigners working here, for whom the CPF is not applicable.
The Income Tax Act already provides tax deductions to employers if they wish to provide corporate retirement plans for all of their employees, including foreigners. In addition, foreigners who wish to save on their own may tap on the Supplementary Retirement Scheme (SRS). They will enjoy tax benefits on the SRS contributions they make. We will continue to review the SRS scheme from time to time.
For the majority of Singaporeans, the CPF remains at the core of our social security system. Beyond mandatory contributions, both individuals and employers can make voluntary contributions to the CPF accounts and enjoy tax benefits. For the less well-off, the Government provides support through top-ups to their CPF accounts, such as through Workfare and housing grants, and the enhanced interest scheme.
: Thank you, Madam. I would like to thank the Senior Minister of State for the reply. Yes, I am aware that Singapore did overall score quite well in the Mercer Index, but the point was that in the adequacy requirement side, we actually scored 56.4 which is below the global average of 63, and adequacy requirement is something that is very important to Singaporeans given the rising costs.
I would like to ask specifically about Section 5 of the Income Tax Act which provides for this sort of corporate retirement plans. There are reports say that there are only about 20 companies in Singapore that currently implement such plans. I would like to know, given that this scheme was there since 1994, why is the take-up rate so low, and is there a way to use corporate retirement plans to supplement our CPF schemes and SRS schemes? And is there a study to see whether our companies are not taking up this Section 5 plans? Is it because maybe the tax benefits are not good enough or it is not widely known and not widely publicised to the companies? Thank you.
: Mdm Speaker, since the Member Mr Yee had talked about Singapore's specific score on retirement adequacy, with your permission, I would like to take a step back, and I do not mean to be technical or to suggest that the index is unhelpful in any way. But I think each time we look at such indices, there is some value to investing the time to understand how they are constructed and what they actually measure.
As far as we know, where corporate retirement plans are concerned, the index assigns a higher score to countries which provide tax advantages for such private plans. In other words, there is a particular item in this index and if a country provides tax advantages for providing private plans, then you would score higher on it. It does not matter whether there are, within that country, schemes like the CPF or even the fact that there are tax benefits for voluntary contributions to the CPF, for example, through the Minimum Sum Top-Up Scheme, none of those things matter.
In fact, if we think about it, even in the absence of private plans on a large-scale basis, employers in Singapore are already required to contribute 17% to an employee's retirement savings through the CPF. That is our CPF contribution rate. And you compare that to Australia where the mandatory contribution is 9.5%, and Denmark which came up tops in this study, the mandatory contribution is between 6% and 11%. If you look narrowly at this score, then you could be led to draw a certain conclusion and forget the fact that even in the absence of large-scale retirement plans -- private plans, corporate retirement plans -- actually, employers in Singapore are already contributing quite a lot to employees' retirement savings through the CPF.
Putting this aside, the key question is whether the so-called shortcoming is something that should be a major concern to us. I would like to reiterate the point, Madam, that it is relevant mainly for foreigners working here for whom the CPF is not applicable. Members would agree with me that our primary concern should be for Singaporeans, unless Mr Yee thinks otherwise.
asked
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance (a) how many appeals on the Pioneer Generation package has the Ministry received as of December 2014; (b) how many of such appeals have been dealt with and what is the rate of success; (c) what are the main grounds of the unsuccessful appeals; and (d) what are the main grounds of the successful appeals.
(for the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance)
: As of 31 December 2014, the Appeals Panel has received about 2,900 appeals, of which about 2,480 have been evaluated, comprising 85% of all appeals received.
As we explained in response to an earlier Parliamentary Question (PQ) and during the debate on the Pioneer Generation Fund Bill, the Panel recognised that the Government had already adopted a more inclusive approach by extending the Pioneer Generation Package to all those born in 1949 or earlier.
Whatever the age set, there will always be those who marginally fall short of it. It would, therefore, not be feasible or fair to let age-related appeals without extending the new age criterion to all Singaporeans.
Hence, as provided under the Pioneer Generation Fund Act, the Panel decided that it would only consider appeals relating to the citizenship criterion.
As part of the evaluation process, the Panel considers whether the person had obtained Singapore citizenship shortly after 1986 – the year set as the citizenship cut-off date for eligibility of the Pioneer Generation Package. In addition, it looks at factors such as whether he or she had been in Singapore since the early years of independence, contributed to our society, and had demonstrated clear efforts to sink roots in Singapore. To date, the Panel has approved 642 of such appeals.
:
Madam, may I ask the Senior Minister of State whether she will take into consideration the lack of means or poverty as one of the mitigating criteria in appeals for PG Package, so that we can be more flexible to applicants in such circumstances?
:
Madam, in response to Dr Neo, we are very mindful that there will always be member sof the Pioneer Generation who saw Singapore through the most difficult periods of our development and they themselves may still have difficulties today. The approach that we would like to take is to reach out to all the pioneers, as many as we can, and help them to benefit from the package. Now, it bears repeating that in setting the criteria, in terms of age as I explained earlier, we had already been more inclusive. In terms of the citizenship criterion, the cut-off was set at 1986 and, in fact, it is 21 years after independence.So, even in that criterion, I think that we have tried to be as generous as possible. So, for the members of our community, who are not in any way able to benefit from the Pioneer Generation Package, if they are Singapore citizens, there are other benefits that apply to them, including the Medisave top-ups that we have made available for five years, to all those aged 55 and above. For the subsidies, for the forthcoming implementation of MediShield Life, they would likely also be able to benefit from it. And with these other forms of support, there is still a need, I think we very much like to know who these individuals are, and find other ways to help them.
:
I noted that the large majority of the unsuccessful appeals is age related. However, there are cases of appeals linked to the ignorance of their parents or a twist of events, that rendered them stateless when Singapore suddently became independent in 1965, and many of them acquired their citizenship after 1986. And they feel to be part of the Pioneer Generation, not because of medical benefits. Will the case of this nature be given special consideration?
:
Madam, I would like to invite Mr Seng to let me know who these individuals are, and then we can reach out to them and see whether there is some way that we can help them.
:
They are pioneers but they did not receive this package, and we have sent in, but replies are pending.
:
We will take another look at it. Thank you.
asked
the Minister for Manpower following plans by the SkillsFuture Council and WDA to develop sectoral manpower strategies for growth sectors such as biologics, precision engineering and services, what are the plans to develop similar manpower strategies for the traditional industries where many SMEs are involved in.
: Mdm Speaker, the Sectoral Manpower Strategies (SMS) is a key initiative under the SkillsFuture Council that brings together employers, unions, education and training providers, and Government to anticipate the future skills that will be needed and set out a strategy for developing those skills in our people. Each SMS seeks to achieve three objectives.
Firstly, identify the current and future skills and manpower needs in the sector, and where there will be quality jobs for our people. To do this, each SMS will need to identify the future skills that will be needed given the industry outlook, stage of development, competitive landscape and impact of key driving forces such as technology advancement.
Secondly, based on the skills needs identified for the sector, articulate and develop clear career progression pathways that will set out the key competencies and skills needed to progress at each stage of the individual's career. These career pathways will be closely integrated with education, training and development – so that there is greater fluidity between learning and working as the individual progresses in his career. In doing so, the SMS achieves two objectives – it builds a future supply of talent to meet the sectors' needs, and provides for more meaningful pathways for workers who choose to work in those sectors.
Lastly, each SMS should include plans to better attract, retain and develop talent, so that workers can acquire deep skills, contribute in their chosen areas of expertise, and have fulfilling careers, with progression not just in wages, but also to gain a deeper sense of pride and satisfaction that comes with mastery of skills.
On a broader level, the SMS encourages a shift among employers – from a "plug and play" mindset where employers seek to hire workers who already have all the necessary skills, without further thought of development and training – this has changed. So we need to move on to an approach where employers will proactively develop every worker, providing career pathways and valuing their contributions as they advance. And some companies are already doing that. The Government will be a key enabler in these efforts, by providing resource support and helping to coordinate and enhance the linkages between all players.
But the key, I think, really lies with industries, sectors and especially the companies in taking that step to develop the workers. As a start, we will focus our efforts on a set of lead sectors that have more pressing manpower needs. These lead sectors cover essential services such as healthcare and social services; new growth sectors that provide exciting job opportunities for Singaporeans but do not necessarily have a ready pipeline of workers, such as biopharmaceuticals; and sectors facing significant manpower challenges, such as construction, retail, and F&B. We will progressively expand our efforts to other sectors.
In direct response to the Member's question, we will pay particular attention to our SMEs. A large proportion of the companies in the lead sectors are SMEs. We recognise the manpower challenges that SMEs face, and how they often have limited resources and bandwidth to plan for the future. So one clear benefit of the Sectoral Manpower Strategies will be to provide SMEs with a clearer sense of the sector's direction and needs, and draw together the necessary resources, from which SMEs can tap, to support the attraction, retention, training and development of workers in their sectors.
In addition, the Government also helps our SMEs through a range of schemes. These include the Enterprise Training Support Grant, Innovation and Capability Voucher (ICV), and the SME Talent Programme. SMEs that need customised advisory services can also approach one of the 12 SME Centres located island-wide. So, through these various measures, we believe that this is the way that we can work together to develop the space as we go forward.
:
The Minister mentioned that for SMEs, they face certain constraints, but another category of workers who may benefit from the Sectoral Manpower Strategies will be your freelancers, sport coaches, cabbies, adult educators, who basically also require skills upgrading in order to prepare themselves for the future. Otherwise, for them, they will have to be the business managers, the implementors, the finance managers and the manpower persons themselves. So, I would like to enquire if the Ministry will consider setting aside some resources or efforts to study the needs of freelancers to see whether or not they can be incorporated into its overall plan when it comes to implement these future strategies.
:
Mdm Speaker, we will be happy to do so, but I would like to emphasise that apart from specific lead sectors, even as it is today, we are looking at providing a wide range of further development and skills upgrading for a full range of workers. What we want to stress is that there are particular sectors that we are emphasising, because they are large sectors that provide opportunities to many. But we recognise that not just for those who are operating individually. There are many different needs in society. So, we do intend to develop that space so that lifelong learning is not just confined to these sectors alone. Every Singaporean would have opportunities to develop themselves in their respective areas. We will be quite happy to take on feedback if there are particular areas and initiatives we think that we can introduce and see how they can be incorporated. But the main idea is that every Singaporean should have before him or her the availability of different schemes and opportunities to upgrade themselves, so that they can either deepen their skills in their particular profession or to switch sectors to do something different.
:
Mdm Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister whether there is anything that can be done to address the acute shortage of manpower in the childcare sector – kindergarten and childcare – because, today, I see the situation of "musical chair". When there is a new childcare centre being set up, there will be a lot of resignations from a nearby childcare centre because the new one cannot get the staff and just offer higher salaries. I do not think that this will solve the problem. I think we need to do more to train and attract more people into this sector. So, is there anything that can be done to address this shortage?
: Mdm Speaker, if the Member would like to file a specific PQ on this, but, broadly, I would say that there are many different sectors today, and not just the childcare sector, that face a challenge in terms of finding manpower. The reasons are as follows: by and large, the economy is doing relatively well. We do have many sectors that are growing and that represents a demand on manpower. Eventually, I think the market will have to find its own stabilisation point, and this applies to the childcare sector as well.
What we do want to make sure is that we provide the training and schemes, and support the growth of the sector. But there are many different sectors growing as well, and I think it is difficult to target it specifically. MSF is looking at various initiatives to expand this because we do recognise that there is a real need. We intend to make sure that schemes are available to train manpower. As to whether we can meet the demands, I think that is a broader issue that can be dealt with separately.
asked
the Minister for Communications and Information and Minister-in-charge of Muslim Affairs (a) for each year from 2012 to 2014, what is the total number of applications that MUIS has received for their Financial Assistance Scheme; (b) what is the percentage of applications approved each year and what are the main reasons for unsuccessful applications; and (b) how does MUIS arrive at the eligibility criterion of a $350 monthly per capita income cap as the basis of its assessment.
11
asked
the Minister for Communications and Information and Minister-in-charge of Muslim Affairs (a) for each year from 2011 to 2013, what is the average monthly number of feedback received by MUIS on their financial assistance scheme(s); (b) what are the most common areas of concern; and (c) what procedures and processes has MUIS put in place to enhance the services rendered to needy families.
:
Madam, can I take Question Nos 10 and 11 together?
:
Yes, please.
: Madam, MUIS provides a range of assistance to needy Muslims, including monthly cash assistance and food vouchers as well as one-off assistance to help pay off outstanding debts for basic necessities such as utility bills and conservancy charges, academic support and burial expenses. MUIS also helps Muslim families through other support schemes, such as the Empowerment Partnership Scheme (EPS) to help our
zakat
families attain self-reliance; PROMAS, which is a progress fund
madrasah
assistance scheme, provides financial assistance for full-time
madrasah
students; and the Islamic Education Fund that provides an education fee subsidy for part-time
madrasah
studies at the mosques. These assistance schemes and programmes are available at the mosques and
madrasahs
, as well as partner-organisations to allow greater accessibility for those in need.
MUIS will typically advise prospective applicants on their eligibility for
zakat
financial assistance. The number of applicants has risen slightly over recent years – in 2012, MUIS received 5,210 applications; in 2013, 5,306 applications; and in 2014, 5,454 applications. Within this period, MUIS approved an average of 99% of these applications each year. Unsuccessful applicants might have sought help on matters for which MUIS does not have an assistance scheme. In such instances, MUIS would refer the applicants to the appropriate public agency.
Madam, in deciding on the PCI cap, firstly, MUIS takes into consideration the sustainability of the assistance scheme in the longer term. Secondly, MUIS'
zakat
financial assistance is meant to supplement the existing national assistance schemes, such as ComCare, and to help those who need it most. MUIS took into account these considerations last year, when it raised the monthly PCI cap from $300 to $350 to extend the support to more families, and increased the amount of assistance to each eligible family.
Between 2011 and 2013, MUIS received on average of about 125 enquiries or items of feedback about its financial assistance schemes every month. These were either received directly by MUIS or via the enhanced mosque clusters. Issues ranged from general queries about MUIS' financial assistance schemes, to specific queries by
zakat
recipients on the status of their assistance.
MUIS studies feedback received from the public as well as from Social Development Officers at our mosques. It regularly reviews the adequacy of its current financial assistance schemes and studies social trends and challenges faced by needy households so as to enhance its schemes and services. As part of this process, MUIS has trained over 520 Mosque Befrienders to conduct regular home visits to long-term
zakat
recipients, so as to better understand and respond to their needs.
:
Thank you, Madam. I would like to thank the Minister for his response. I have three supplementary questions. I would like to know how often MUIS conducts reviews on its financial assistance scheme criteria. As the Minister mentioned just now, the last review was conducted in July last year. I would also like to know when was the last review prior to the one in July 2014. My third question is who are the personnel involved in the review process.
:
Madam, as mentioned by the Member, the last time we reviewed this was last year, in July 2014. I cannot remember specifically when we did the one before that, but we do this on an annual basis, looking at the trends at the national level. The personnel involved are the MUIS officers, together in consultation with our Board members who are in the
zakat
committee. We also used the feedback that we receive and from the general trends taking place at the national level.
: Minister, I have three supplementary questions.
(1) Where does MUIS get the majority of its funding for its financial assistance programme?
(2) Would a person be denied financial assistance from MUIS if he or she has been receiving financial assistance from other organisations?
(3) Recently, there were allegations that some families were denied financial assistance from MUIS but received financial assistance from other religious organisations. What was the outcome of MUIS' investigations into this issue?
: Madam, all of our financial assistance schemes are being funded by the
zakat
fund. Everything else that we collect goes into the general fund which is meant for the purpose of running MUIS. No one will be denied financial assistance if they meet our criteria. They may have received assistance from ComCare or any other national agency, but if they come to MUIS, and if they meet our criteria, we will give them the assistance. As I had mentioned in my reply, the approach is really for us to take advantage of what is available at the national level before coming to MUIS; we will complement that.
On the allegations that the Member mentioned, I am not sure exactly which one the Member is referring to. We receive many of those. But the one that I think that the Member was referring to that was circulating online recently. We have investigated and found that there is no truth all to those allegations. In fact, the family has been assisted by MUIS.
asked
the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth what is being done to ensure that our national athletes receive adequate medical support, given that the Singapore Sports Institute has been without any full time Sports Physician for the past two years.
: Madam, the Singapore Sports Institute (SSI) runs a sports medical centre that is supported by visiting sports physicians and consultants, as well as a team of in-house physiotherapists and trainers. In addition, it has tie-ups with three public hospitals – Changi General Hospital, Khoo Teck Puat Hospital and Tan Tock Seng Hospital. Under these tie-ups, experienced visiting sports physicians provide quality medical support and specialist care to our national athletes.
I agree with the Member that it is important for the SSI to have a resident Medical Director to ensure a robust system is in place to oversee the medical needs of our national athletes. Sport Singapore has intensified the search for such a full-time Sports Physician and we hope to find a suitable candidate soon.
:
Mdm Speaker, I would like to declare my interest. I run two sports medicine centres and I thank the Minister for his reassuring reply. I have just one supplementary question. The network that the Minister mentioned has the advantages of bandwidth because it is relying on institutional resources. The disadvantage of that is that it lacks in-house capabilities, and we need the in-house capabilities for research that is specific to the national athletes. So, a better solution would be to have both in-house as well as the network capabilities. In relation to that, I would like to ask the Minister if the sports medicine network is the permanent solution, or is that an interim solution, and is the Minister exploring other options or models.
: Madam, I would perhaps first want to emphasise that our assurance to the Member and all our athletes is that that we want to do everything we can to provide the best possible and timely medical support to all our national athletes. Any athlete that needs medical care should and will get timely and effective medical care. So, we will find the best possible solution to provide such medical support.
What is the model? I do not think there is a silver bullet. We will have to work through various solutions and it probably will entail a mix of both a good network of partners as well as capabilities in-house. And as I had mentioned, we are continuing to build up and strengthen our capabilities within the Singapore Sports Institute. We are doing that not just in our search for a resident doctor but also building up our team of physiotherapists and trainers.
Beyond providing medical care, in-house and through the network, the Singapore Sports Institute Medical Centre is also doing more going upstream, for example, doing more in terms of injury prevention, advising athletes on the steps that they should take to minimise injuries, conducting injury-prevention workshops or, for example, working more closely with the National Sports Associations and the coaches to look at the kinds of training regimes that athletes go through to ensure that they do not over-strain and they take the necessary safety precautions.
asked
the Minister for Transport (a) how many small delivery vans will be due for COE renewal in the next three years; (b) whether big lorries and goods vans fall into different COE categories; and (c) with a satellite-based ERP system, whether the Ministry will do an overall review of all their policies relating to motor vehicles, including the COE.
(for the Minister for Transport)
: Madam, about 31,000 small delivery vans will see their Certificates of Entitlement (COE) expire between now and 2017.
All goods vehicles and commercial buses, whether large or small, fall within Category C of the COE bidding system. It is not desirable to have too many categories catering to different vehicle sizes as it can lead to excessive volatility in quota numbers and prices in each category.
Objectively speaking, the COE system has served us well in controlling the overall vehicle population. Road pricing, on the other hand, helps us manage regular road congestion by influencing road usage decisions. The two systems complement one another. A satellite-based Electronic Road Pricing system will certainly allow us to have more precise usage pricing, such as through distance-based charging on congested roads, and we will be reviewing in the next few years before ERP2 is implemented at the end of this decade, whether any of our policies could be improved. However, fundamentally, in land-scarce Singapore, controls on both vehicle ownership and usage will still be needed.
:
Mdm Speaker, I would like to ask two supplementary questions. The COE, to a large extent, has controlled the population of the cars. However, because the big trucks, big lorries and small vans are all placed under the same categories, a lot of feedback says that because of the fierce tendering system, the smaller companies, the SMEs who need the small vans, cannot compete with the big companies who have the capabilities and the muscle to tender for the COEs. I would like to ask, is there any other way to help the SMEs who need the vans for their businesses. Secondly, how many COEs will be available over the next three years, as the Senior Minister of State mentioned earlier that 31,000 COEs will be expiring?
: Mdm Speaker, as Er Dr Lee was asking the question and expressing the concern that bigger companies were outbidding smaller companies who need smaller vehicles in Category C, it reminded me of an argument that was made very strongly just one or two years back that if we removed taxis from Category A, we would see a very different premium. In any case, we did remove taxi companies from bidding in Category A, but I think the results suggest that that argument was probably unfounded.
So, to the Member's suspicion, it is not something that we can prove or disprove. But I would say, the point that the Member raised that we want to attend to is that some smaller businesses do face pressures in terms of needing a vehicle for their business. Where we have put our efforts is in trying to be helpful to businesses in general, and small businesses in particular, where they need vehicles for the smooth operation of their businesses. There are several measures to help them manage the cost of vehicles.
Firstly, for example, commercial vehicles are subject to lower vehicle taxes. And when businesses purchase a vehicle, the Additional Registration Fee for commercial vehicles is set at 5% of the vehicle's Open Market Value (OMV), compared to an effective rate of between 100% and 180% of the OMV for cars. Commercial vehicles also enjoy lower effective road tax and are exempted from diesel fuel taxes.
Secondly, businesses are allowed repeated five-year renewals of their COE. Earlier on, I mentioned that 31,000 small delivery vans will have their COEs expiring between now and 2017. A large majority – more than 80% of them – has more than five years of statutory life remaining. They can thus choose to go for two consecutive five-year renewals, instead of renewing directly onto a 10-year COE. So, that facilitates their cashflow management.
Thirdly, we introduced the early turnover scheme where businesses can transfer any unused COE life to a new vehicle and enjoy discounts if they replace their more pollutive pre-Euro and Euro-1 diesel commercial vehicles. In addition, they do not need to bid for a new Category C COE. They only need to pay a discounted prevailing quota premium for such vehicles when they turn it over. And since the scheme was enhanced in March last year, in fact, the discount on the prevailing quota premium is, on average, $23,000, a very considerable amount. That is why we have seen a steady increase in the take-up on the early turn-over scheme.
These are some of the measures that we take to help businesses where vehicles are concerned. These measures are also complemented by other Government schemes to assist all Small and Medium Enterprises directly with tax deductions, grants or micro loans.
As to the Member's second question on how many COEs will become available, your guess is as good as mine. It really depends on several factors. It depends on how many vehicles are deregistered and it also depends on what is the permitted vehicle growth rate, which we have already given indication of. But the de-registration really depends on the vehicle owners themselves. Analysts have given their own projections and forecasts. I think it is something that we will only really know when the de-registrations take place.
:
I thank the Senior Minister of State for the answer. But I think we cannot because of the example of the taxi COEs not achieving the effect that we would like to see, that we should not try to come up with a category for the small vans. The feedback is that many of them, they have already renewed the COEs, but how many times can they keep on extending it? They need the vans for their business, so I would like to ask whether there is any difficulty in allocating a certain number of COEs for the small vans. Thank you.
: Madam, as I have explained earlier in my reply, it is something that we have to be quite careful in thinking through. The more categories we split them into, it means that within each category the numbers that can be made available for bidding each cycle would likely be much more volatile, and we have to ask ourselves whether that is, in fact, helpful to small businesses.
So, we understand completely where Er Dr Lee Bee Wah is coming from but we also have to ask whether the alternative what the Member has suggested is in fact, going to be helpful to small and medium enterprises.
And, please, let me assure Members that if it is something that is indeed likely to be beneficial, there is no reason why we cannot consider it. Thank you.
asked
the Minister for Foreign Affairs if he can provide an update on the measures and plans that will be implemented by Singapore and other APEC members as part of the Beijing Declaration on Fighting Corruption agreed to at the 2014 APEC Ministerial Meeting.
(for the Minister for Foreign Affairs)
:Mdm Speaker, the Beijing Declaration on Fighting Corruption, endorsed at the APEC Ministerial Meeting held in Beijing in November 2014, was a key deliverable of the APEC Anti-Corruption and Transparency Working Group (ACTWG). It reflected a collective commitment towards international cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region on the fight against corruption. Singapore welcomed the Declaration, and is committed to play our part in areas such as mutual legal assistance, exchanges of best practices, as well as capacity-building amongst anti-corruption and law enforcement authorities.
It is important to strengthen pragmatic anti-corruption efforts amongst APEC member economies as corrupt offences and the movement of illicitly acquired assets can be transnational in nature. Singapore has in place a framework for international cooperation with overseas legal, law enforcement and regulatory agencies. The Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act (MACMA) enables Singapore to provide mutual legal assistance to other jurisdictions, in relation to criminal investigations or criminal proceedings for offences covered by the Act. While we have legal instruments and other enforcement cooperation mechanisms in place to buttress Singapore's commitment towards fulfilling our international obligations, we must also ensure that such undertakings do not undermine the integrity and sovereignty of our legal framework.
A significant initiative noted in the Declaration was the establishment of the APEC Network of Anti-Corruption Authorities and Law Enforcement Agencies (ACT-NET) which is an informal network for anti-corruption and law enforcement practitioners from member economies to share information and exchange best practices. Singapore welcomed the formation of the ACT-NET and is committed to engage meaningfully to collaborate with, and learn from law enforcement authorities within the APEC community. CPIB represented Singapore at the first ACT-NET meeting in Beijing, August 2014, where members shared best practices on informal and formal requests from foreign counterparts for assistance relating to corruption cases. CPIB also participated in the first capacity building workshop on fugitive repatriation and asset recovery held in Beijing in December 2014.
The Beijing Declaration on Fighting Corruption also attaches great importance to capacity-building of anti-corruption and law enforcement authorities in the Asia Pacific region. CPIB will continue to render cooperation and assistance to counterparts in areas such as personnel training, study visits, specific training in the areas such as financial investigation and computer forensic.
To ask
the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources (a) whether statistics on the population of vectors (mosquitoes, flies, cockroaches, rodents and rat fleas) are available and, if so, whether there has been an increase; and (b) whether there are new measures to bring these vectors under control.
:
Madam, Question No 15, please.
(for the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources)
: Mdm Speaker, I am afraid I have to disappoint the Member for not being able to provide statistics on some of the very specific categories of vectors that he has mentioned in his Parliamentary Question (PQ), particularly on flies, cockroaches and rat fleas. But the Member has our assurance that the National Environment Agency (NEA) actively monitors the disease-bearing vector situation.
NEA implements an integrated rodent surveillance and vector control programme comprising surveillance, control, public engagement, law enforcement and research. From January 2014 to November 2014, over 35,000 rodent burrows have been detected and treated by NEA. This reflects how important it is for the owners of premises, especially operators of food establishments to practise good housekeeping habits such as adopting good refuse management regimes. The key to rodent control is to eliminate food sources.
Dengue continues to be a problem. As at November 2014, more than 16,000 mosquito breeding sites have been found, a drop of 19% from the same period the year before. Amongst the new measures introduced in 2014, NEA has piloted the Gravitrap surveillance programme in clusters and high-risk areas as a control tool and a guide for pre-emptive control operations. Now, there are some statistics we can gather from this Gravitrap programme. But let me explain that this is by no means a comprehensive surveillance of the entire country. But where we have placed Gravitraps, we estimated from the start of the programme that some 32,000 mosquitoes have been caught in these Gravitraps. So I am not sure what to make of it, but this is the first year when we have such a statistic, so we will probably use this as a basis for study going forward. I assure Members that we do not spend time doing a count, I am sure it is by some estimation.
NEA has also tightened surveillance and enforcement efforts in high-risk premises, such as construction sites. Since January 2014, 120 Stop Work Orders have been issued to construction sites to ensure that proper mosquito control measures are in place before construction resumed. In the longer term, NEA is exploring the suppression of the local dengue-carrying
Aedes aegypti
mosquito population through biological control, which is, the use of
Wolbachia
-carrying male mosquitoes.
All home and premises owners, Town Councils and managers of public areas have to take responsibility to minimise the breeding of these vectors. NEA's officers cannot be everywhere anytime, all the time.
:
Thank you, Madam. May I ask the Minister whether NEA will further co-fund Town Councils on vector control, especially rodent control and mosquito control? The other question is will NEA step up preventive measures at food centres in rodent control, especially in taking those with unhygienic practices to task? Lastly, is there any update on vaccines for dengue? Thank you.
:Mdm Speaker, I would like to thank the Member for the supplementary questions. On co-funding of some of these rodent control programmes, NEA is keen to work with the Town Councils. In fact, we have been working with the Town Councils since 2011 when we brought back the Rat Attack programme, and we will be happy to discuss with the Town Councils on how we can further collaborate and co-operate with one another on fighting rodents.
I absolutely agree with the Member on the need for strict enforcement and, indeed, that is what NEA has done. We have been inspecting food establishments on a regular basis. In fact, we have increased the number for vector control officers in the last few years. So, we are putting more enforcement officers on the ground, and where we find infringements of regulations and unhygienic conditions, we will not hesitate to take strict enforcement steps.
On the issues of vaccines, we are still watching the development closely. At this point in time, we do not have specific news to share with the House, but if we do, we will definitely do so.
:
Miss Penny Low.
: Thank you, Mdm Speaker. There have been more reports on the increase in rodents lately and I am wondering whether NEA has done any study to discover the reason for such an increase, or is it that there is just more visibility of rodents in, especially, housing estates.
Apart from rodents, there have also been quite a lot of reports about pigeon nuisance, especially roosting in HDB flats. Could NEA also take more stringent actions, especially on feeding, so that the issue does not multiply to affect all the other residents living the housing estates? Thank you.
: Mdm Speaker, with regard to the supplementary question about increased sightings of rodents, I think from NEA's point of view, it is still down to the very basic operations. In other words, keep the source of food in- check, ensure that the available food sources for rodents are not there. I think that is the best way to eradicate.
It is also enforcement as well. So, we have to step up on inspections, and step up on operations. Again, I would like to emphasise that we need all the stakeholders from food stall operators, restaurant operators to companies that are in charge of cleaning, commercial properties, and so on, to really step up and play a part in ensuring that we have a hygienic and clean environment for everyone.
We have some studies on the population of rats but, really, I think the best way is to just make sure that they do not have the food sources that allow them to propagate.
On the issue of pigeons, I believe that there is a subsequent Parliamentary Question (PQ) that, Mdm Speaker if you would allow, then I would answer the supplementary question along with the subsequent PQ.
:
Yes, please.
To ask
the Minister for Manpower with more working Singaporeans requiring to perform the role of secondary caregivers to their ailing parents, siblings or children who are not mobile, whether the Ministry will consider statutory paid caregiver leave to ease our workers' burden of caring for their family members.
:
Question No 16.
(for the Minister for Manpower)
:We recognise that, with our rapidly ageing population and decreasing family size, it is important to support working Singaporeans who need help in caring for their family members. At the same time, we are mindful that mandating more family care leave can have an impact on business operations.
Our approach is to work with our tripartite partners to promote work-life practices, including providing family care leave beyond the statutory requirements and flexible work arrangements.
A survey by the Ministry of Manpower found that the proportion of employers providing parental care leave or parental sick leave has almost tripled from 6% in 2008 to 17% last year. The proportion of employers providing at least one form of flexible work arrangement has also gone up from 28% in 2008 to 47% last year. The survey also found that almost seven in 10 employers – 69% – provided unplanned time-off for their employees to attend to personal matters in 2014.
Employers are setting new industry norms, and they recognise that such practices help to attract and retain talent. For instance, the Civil Service, as the largest employer in Singapore, provides two days of annual parent-care leave as a progressive employment practice.
We also introduced a series of family-related leave schemes on 1 May 2013, as part of the Marriage and Parenthood Package. Businesses are still adjusting and adapting to some of these leave requirements. So, let us monitor the impact of these changes before we consider legislating more family care leave.
Nonetheless, I would like to encourage more employers to adopt work-life practices such as family care leave and flexible work arrangements as a strategy to attract good workers in this tight labour market and motivate them.
Work-life practices lead to win-win outcomes – employees can better attend to their personal and family needs, while a more motivated workforce can benefit employers in terms of lower absenteeism, higher employee retention and better productivity.
: Order. End of Question Time.
[
Pursuant to Standing Order No. 22(3), Written Answers to Question Nos. 17-30 on the Order Paper are reproduced in the Appendix. ]
﻿
: Mdm Speaker, I beg to move, "That the Bill be now read a Second time."
We all want to maintain and strengthen the harmonious industrial relations that we have here in Singapore. Managing our foreign workforce well is part of the effort. It is a wide-ranging topic. Much has been done and other new measures will also be introduced in good time. This Bill is one part of the broader effort. It is the result of work put in over the past few years and specifically addresses the regulations of larger dormitories.
I understand that there are current concerns regarding the housing and living conditions of some foreign workers, and I appreciate the feedback that Members of this House and also fellow Singaporeans have been providing. Indeed, there is a comprehensive set of existing rules which regulate the living conditions of foreign employees, safeguard their safety and well-being, and reduce disamenities on the neighbours. These apply to all forms of foreign worker accommodation, and cover areas such as building and fire safety, minimum living space, and hygiene standards. These standards are in place and will be enforced and will continue to be so. Many of the unsafe or unsanitary conditions that some Members have referred to are conditions that already contravene these existing rules; and we have taken and will continue to take firm action against errant parties. All relevant Government agencies such as the Building and Construction Authority (BCA), the Singapore Civil Defence Force (SCDF) and the National Environment Agency (NEA) are committed to not only step up enforcement of existing requirements and deter such transgressions, but to also continue to raise standards over time.
So, why is this Bill needed? First, Government's longer-term view is that the accommodation needs of Work Permit Holders are best met in such dormitories, where there are self-contained living, social and recreational facilities. We have been launching new and larger Purpose Built Dormitory (PBD) sites over the past few years, and will continue doing so to meet housing demand for a foreign workforce, especially for the Construction, Marine and Process sectors. Such larger PBDs will form an increasingly prominent part of the foreign worker housing landscape.
Second, and more importantly, there will be different concerns due to the scale of the developments. This Bill is therefore a progressive measure aimed at ensuring better design parameters and requirements that would be woven into the development of these new PBDs as they are being built. I would like to emphasise again that the existing regulations will continue to apply to both larger and smaller dormitories. The new regulations complement rather than replace existing ones.
Madam, let me now move into the key provisions of the Bill. We propose to impose additional requirements on larger dormitories with 1,000 beds or more through a licensing regime. Dormitories which meet the threshold will be required to obtain a licence, in addition to complying with all existing regulatory standards. It includes existing dormitories which already house 1,000 foreign workers; or are approved to house this number of workers, even if they currently do not.
Broadly, the new licensing framework will mandate requirements that cover public health and safety, security and public order, and the provision and maintenance of social and commercial facilities and services. This is by way of licensing conditions which I will elaborate on later. A Commissioner for Foreign Employee Dormitories will be appointed to oversee the administration of the new Bill.
The licensing regime will effectively cover all current and upcoming PBDs, as well as all dormitories on industrial premises, and even on-site workers' quarters that meet the 1,000-bed threshold. All the new PBDs coming on-stream will meet this threshold. Over the next two years, as more PBDs become operational, these higher standards will accordingly benefit a greater proportion of foreign workers.
Then, there is also a matter of practicality. Some of these requirements that we will impose, such as outdoor recreation spaces and minimarts, are only possible in dorms with a certain physical capacity.
But what about the "smaller" dormitories – those that do not quite cross the 1,000-bed threshold? What then? As I have mentioned earlier, it is important to remember that these "smaller" dormitories will continue to be subject to our existing comprehensive regulations to protect the safety and well-being of residents. Residential premises not covered under the Bill will also continue to be subject to existing regulations pertaining to fire and structural safety, hygiene, sub-letting and change of use.
We have also taken care to ensure that there is proper accountability. The holder of the licence, who will be the operator, is responsible for the day-to-day running of the dormitory. Actions by the operator can have a large impact on residents' well-being. Hence, in assessing the suitability of an operator for a licence, we will look at the prospective operator's financial capacity and track record; and whether the operator can comply with the licensing conditions.
In addition, the Commissioner may give a directive to the licensed operator to rectify a breach or unsatisfactory operations, or to do anything in the interest of public health and safety. If the licensed operator is prevented by the dorm owner or proprietor from complying with any directive, we propose to be able to also hold the dorm owner or proprietor accountable for failing to comply with the directive.
I mentioned earlier that the Commissioner for Foreign Employee Dormitories will be able to impose conditions which licensed dormitories must comply with. Let me provide some examples of the conditions we will be imposing. These have been formulated in consultation with all relevant Government agencies; and informed by MPs, who have worked with us on foreign worker issues.
One example is that operators must develop quarantine plans, in the event of an infectious disease outbreak, and provide sufficient sick bay facilities, based on guidelines set by the Ministry of Health. Another is to require operators to establish Emergency Response Plans in consultation with SCDF and the Police to deal with fires or other potential public order incidents.
To cater to residents' social and recreational needs, we will require licensed dorms to have indoor and outdoor recreation areas; amenities like ATM machines, minimarts and mail collection points; as well as regular recreational events during Sundays and public holidays. These provide convenient options for workers to socialise. It also means that they do not have to travel far to run simple errands, and eating into their rest hours.
The Bill also sets out the proposed penalties for the various infringements and other enforcement actions that might be taken. We have deliberately set relatively high penalties as a deterrent. We have also provided for a broad suite of tools to allow the Commissioner to require that errant parties remedy their breaches.
The highest proposed penalty is for operating an unlicensed dormitory under clause 7, and is a fine of up to $500,000, or imprisonment of up to two years, or both, for a first offence. For a repeat offence, the penalty will be doubled. We are also proposing a substantial penalty for the breach of each licensing condition. Clause 11 provides that the maximum penalty is a fine of up to $50,000, or imprisonment of up to one year, or both, for each condition contravened.
Licensed operators who intend to cease operating a dormitory must apply to the Commissioner for approval at least 28 days in advance. This is to provide sufficient lead time for employers and dormitory residents to secure alternative accommodation. Cessation of operations without the Commissioner's approval is an offence under clause 20.
Under clause 28, the Commissioner may choose to compound certain offences under the Bill, which are generally less severe in nature. This will allow flexibility to act against egregious breaches in a calibrated manner.
In addition, we have put in place various provisions to ensure that any non-compliance can be remedied.
Firstly, under clause 13, the Commissioner may issue a compliance directive to require the operator or proprietor to carry out specific instructions to remedy breaches or unsatisfactory operations, or in the interests of public health or safety. If rectification is not done to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, the Commissioner can also step in to carry out any works specified in the directive, and recover the costs incurred from the licensed operator or proprietor.
Secondly, under clause 15, the Commissioner may issue a business restriction directive. Dormitories that are issued a business restriction directive can continue housing existing residents, but will not be allowed to renew or extend existing tenancy agreements, or enter into new contracts for a specified period.
Additionally, the Commissioner also has the power to require the operator to furnish a performance bond, suspend a licence for up to six months, or revoke a licence. The Commissioner may also disqualify persons from managing or holding licences to operate dormitories for specified periods. The offences under the new legislation must be effectively enforced on the ground. To this end, officers who are appointed as dormitory inspectors will be provided with the necessary powers to enter, search and collect evidence from premises. These powers take reference from those currently accorded to inspectors under similar legislation, such as the Employment of Foreign Manpower Act and the Employment Agencies Act. Our inspectors will also be empowered to arrest suspected unlicensed operators or proprietors. I wish to assure the House that our officers will exercise these enhanced powers judiciously – balancing health and safety imperatives while minimising disruptions to business continuity where possible.
Ultimately, it is in our interest to ensure that the new legislation can be practically implemented. To this end, we have extensively engaged the dormitory industry over the course of the last year. The industry has been largely supportive of the need for additional regulations for the larger dorms.
Nevertheless, we understand that existing large dormitories that were built based on earlier tender specifications may not be able to meet the new standards being set. We will therefore exercise some flexibility in implementation. We will allow a six-month transition period from the date the proposed Bill comes into effect in the second half of 2015 to enable them to level up their standards and obtain the necessary licence. We will also provide some assistance to dorm operators to ease the transition and to mitigate the increased costs resulting from the additional requirements.
Beyond the current Bill, I wish to assure Members that work on other foreign worker management initiatives is ongoing, and different public sector agencies are doing their part. For example, agencies are keeping a close watch on areas where there are already clusters of foreign worker housing, especially where infrastructure, like roads and sewers, are unable to support further intensification. Since November last year, the Urban Redevelopment Authority has identified 12 industrial estates where it will no longer approve applications to convert factory space into new foreign workers' dormitories, as well as applications to increase the number of workers in existing factory-converted dorms.
The Government has also been launching dedicated foreign worker recreation centres, particularly in areas where larger numbers of foreign workers are housed. These centres provide alternative gathering spots for workers, and offer a wider range of amenities that individual dormitories may not be able to.
There are currently four such centres and more will be launched over the next two years. In addition, we will step up measures to educate foreign workers about Singapore laws and social norms. For known foreign worker gathering areas, we can deploy additional uniformed auxiliary police officers and devote extra resources to step up cleaning efforts to meet the needs of residents living nearby. Our agencies also stand ready to work together, as we have done so with Members of Parliament and grassroots leaders to address local issues in a coordinated manner.
Mdm Speaker, this Bill is the result of a lot of effort, work done over the past number of years. There have been extensive consultations with stakeholders and Members of the House. It is the culmination of intensive inter-Ministry work over a long period.
This Bill gives us greater regulatory powers as larger purpose-built dormitories (PBDs) are built to better address the housing and living needs of foreign workers. Due to the different dynamics that come with larger sites, it is necessary for the Government to start up-stream and put in place these additional regulations. I will repeat, there are existing regulations that continue to be enforced, and we continue to monitor them and to improve on them, to strengthen them as it goes on. Going forward, we will be seeing many more PBDs built of this scale, which is why it is important to add on some of these additional requirements, because the nature and dynamics of the far larger dorms are quite different from some of the smaller ones. For the smaller ones, some of the existing concerns can be addressed in different ways.
I would, therefore, like to thank everyone who had contributed to making this Bill possible. With these enhanced levers, I am confident that we will be able to provide a good and safe living environment for dormitory residents and manage the dormitories' potential impact on their surrounding communities. Managing our foreign workforce is a wide topic. It is being addressed on many fronts. This Bill, in particular, addresses a specific area of concern, which is how best do we regulate the larger dormitories that are going to come online. With that Madam, I beg to move.
Question proposed.
:
Mdm Speaker, I rise in support of this timely Bill. As of June 2014, there were about 770,000 non-domestic Work Permit holders in Singapore. About half of those workers are non-Malaysian construction, marine and process workers who require housing in Singapore.
Presently, such foreign worker housing, whether small or large, are subjected to rigorous regulatory standards. Such regulations include the safe upkeep and maintenance of sanitary and hygiene conditions.
However, in recent months, there have been several unsettling reports that have called our attention to the poor living standards and conditions that some foreign workers are subjected to. For example, in November last year, a spot check conducted by the Migrant Workers' Centre found about 50 construction workers from Bangladesh and India being housed in two-bedroom condominium apartments along Selegie Road. Possibly the most troubling, was a photograph that was published in August, which exposed the deplorable living conditions and bathing facilities that some foreign workers were subjected to when they were housed on-site at a construction site in Punggol.
I support this Bill, Mdm Speaker, but I would like to ask three pertinent questions. The first is: would the Minister clarify why the proposed licensing regime only seeks to target larger dorms with 1,000 beds and over, when a large proportion of foreign workers in Singapore reside in dormitories which have less than 1,000 beds? While these smaller dormitories will continue to be caught under existing regulations, what was the reason for not including them under the new framework as well?
Also, could the Minister outline how the Ministry will keep a close eye on dormitory operators to prevent them from deliberately keeping numbers below the 1,000 bed threshold to escape the licensing requirements proposed under this Bill?
Therefore, in setting out a new regulatory and licensing regime, we must be careful not to inadvertently incentivize dormitory operators to circumvent these important requirements by deliberately operating dormitories with less than 1,000 beds.
While the majority of foreign workers have expressed their satisfaction with respect to working conditions in Singapore, many of them leave their families behind in search of a brighter future, and therefore, we should respect the dignity of these foreign workers by providing them with safe and humane living conditions. Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister whether there will be a move to extend the regulations contained in this Bill to dormitories which have less than 1,000 beds. Nonetheless, Madam, I support this timely Bill.
: Mr Yeo Guat Kwang. Assoc Prof Fatimah Lateef.
:
Mdm Speaker, I stand in support of the Bill. Pertaining to the threshold set at 1,000 bed spaces, I can understand the practicality of this from the Minister's explanation. However, my concern is that the smaller dormitories – 600, 800, 999 bed spaces – are we going subject them to some kind of regulation? Sure, there are current guidelines that are present and in practice, but you and I know that there are some improvements that still need to be done. I echo hon Member Christopher de Souza's call to update us as to whether there will be plans going forward for these smaller dormitories as well.
Next, Madam, whatever the size of the dormitory, all of them play an important part and role in housing our foreign workers. They contribute to the brand name and reputation of Singapore when it comes to our handling of foreign workers. Therefore, I feel very strongly about this, that we should we should really review this on more practical basis.
What about employers who house their foreign workers on factory sites, in office buildings and make shift places, including some residential areas which are also overcrowded? I hope that we can work in partnership stronger with the Ministry and the URA in handling some of this issues that we face at the ground level.
Next, can I also ask the Minister about the exclusion criteria being set at 1,000 bed spaces in the Bill as it stands, what proportion of our foreign workers currently will be excluded if we set this at 1,000 bed spaces, and what will be its target in the next three years, five years, 10 years perhaps?
Madam, the licensing framework is a good progressive move on the part of the Ministry and I would applaud that. It is also a step in the right direction forward towards proper management of our foreign workers is also linked to their welfare. The compliance to these regulations and licensing requirements will certainly pose heavy investments in various areas, and my concern is also that this may ultimately trickle down to the employers of foreign workers. How will MOM be monitoring this as we move forward?
Next, the land prices for building dormitories have reached pretty high levels now, and at times, even unprecedented levels. For example, recently a tender was awarded for nearly S$150 million for a dormitory for housing some 9,000 foreign workers, on a 20-year old piece of land, and this is one example. This again represents the very heavy investment I referred to earlier.
Can the Ministry consider working with the relevant authorities to announce sites to be released for tender on a slightly longer term, perhaps on a yearly basis? This will help interested parties research and make more informed choices, such as sensible investment and pricing. Given the current and future climate of such developments, it is a big undertaking and bears huge risk to these employers.
Madam, finally, the current dormitory operators will be given six months to comply with the new regulations and policies. Will this time be sufficient? My concern is for the older dormitories which may need major renovations and upgrading to the stipulated standards. Will the Ministry be working with the operators to customise and give those that need a little more time to revamp their operations, logistics and practices some leeway, but of course, with close oversight. Madam I support the Bill.
: Mdm Speaker, the Foreign Employee Dormitories Bill holds special significance to the work that I perform as the Chairman of the Migrant Workers' Centre, MWC.
To the MWC, shortage of purpose-built housing facilities to meet the needs of our migrant workers has in fact been a major issue. Anecdotally, MWC's close working relationship with our operators of our commercial dormitories, as well as our housing activities for the homeless and the destitute workers, has allowed our team to actually witness the dormitory rentals increase from about $170 per bed space in 2009, to about $350 today – a 100% increase within a period of just less than five years. Thus, in the last two years, Madam, calls from the migrant workers advocacy groups, including the Migrant Workers' Centre, has led to the Government concerted efforts moving forwards to opening up more new supplies of purpose-built housing. This is encouraging and I must commend the Ministry of Manpower, the Ministry of National Development and their agencies for this positive response.
Yet, Madam, our authorities have themselves continued to be mindful that such a ramp-up will not be able to render the operation of smaller dormitory types, like the factory converted or temporary dormitories, obsolete. Statistics from our authorities as reported in the media show that roughly half of the 400,000 plus workers requiring customised migrant workers' housing, are currently accommodated in the 50 purpose-built dormitories here, while the other half continue to be housed in smaller, often less well-run housing facilities.
Madam, this is where our concerns are centred. The Migrant Workers' Centre has operated the only 24-hour distress hotline here for the non-domestic workers from 1 July 2014 and has through this facility received quite a number of housing related complaints from our migrant workers. Our case data shows that the complaints from migrant workers almost all concerns are about smaller factory-converted, temporary or even makeshift accommodation arrangements accommodating less than 1,000 workers. Just a few months ago, in November 2014, the MWC itself responded quite aggressively to one such case in Selegie, where information uncovered by my team suggested that more than 100 migrant workers were being housed in just two small residential condominium units.
Madam, it is precisely these experiences that lead us to the belief that while the Government strives to implement a viable long-term solution for high-standard, purpose-built migrant worker's housing, we cannot ignore, and should in fact double our efforts and also regulatory control against errant housing operators, especially among the smaller, less formal housing operations, plainly because this is where the bulk of the abuses have and continue to occur. Madam, we hope the Foreign Employee Dormitories Bill could cover all dormitories in Singapore, regardless of size, type or management mode.
While I applaud the policy-makers for this strategic piece of legislation, l seek the Government's assurance that in the interim, before we arrive at the desired state of affairs, its strict attention and enforcement of all basic rules and standards regardless of types, and especially size will continue aggressively, and in a co-ordinated, concerted fashion.
The MWC and I am certain, all other migrant activist groups, will continue to meet our authorities halfway in this endeavour, to surface intelligence as eyes and ears, that we are closest to the ground. The MWC also stands ready to come in and partner the authorities to provide temporary housing, or any other kinds of assistance where investigations or enforcement action renders workers without proper shelter or other protection and care.
For example, after a fire had broken out at a workers' quarters in Geylang last December, and sadly led to the loss of lives and serious injury.
The MWC team was among the first to arrive at the scene and the hospitals to offer our assistance and care to the workers. We continue to be in contact with the employers of the four deceased workers from the incident to ensure that they do right and stand by their workers and also help their next of kin. Recently when the last seriously injured worker was discharged from hospital, and through his own wanting, was sent home, the MWC was also on hand to offer support as well as observe the proper discharge of his employer's duties and responsibilities before he returned to Sabah.
My MWC team will continue to work all affected employers to see how, in addition to their legal responsibilities to their workers, a shared monetary token may also be given to the families of the seriously injured and the deceased.
Madam, now I would like to turn to the feedback I have gathered from operators of larger dormitories to which the framework of the Foreign Employee Dormitories Bill will apply.
The MWC has long advocated for on-site social and commercial amenities to be included in the planning of new dormitories. Together with health and safety considerations as well as security concerns, whether within individual dormitories or in clusters, had resulted in the MWC being the first to moot the idea of forming an industry association, which could, aside from their other responsibilities, present an industry representative to work with our authorities in developing and implementing the industry-wide standards. Having advised on the formation of the Dormitory Association of Singapore Limited (DASL) in January 2013, and we have been working very closely with them, I was quite glad to know that actually they are in support of the FEDB. I must also thank the Government agencies for helping the members of DASL to be able to be engaged and consulted to give such an outcome.
Madam, the licensing framework will no doubt enhance the ability to deal with large-scale public and personal security, and even health and also pandemic incidents arising within dormitories. More importantly, in the longer term, dormitories will need to direct their resources and leverage on economies of scale of their business and plough these back into catering in-house to the non-work amenities and needs of their residents.
However, during our discussion, there is one worry that has kept coming up – the inadvertent creation and, much worse, perpetuation of a double standard by the FEDB's segregation between the smaller and larger dormitories. Even more worrying are the negative externalities that might arise if this "double standard" is allowed to become structured.
Madam, let me elaborate. Today, employers constantly grapple with their business costs and depending on the considerations that drive them, and the degree of importance they place on keeping costs as low as possible, many of the more errant bosses prefer to house their workers in a cheaper, less favourable, and often smaller accommodation. The cases are well publicised and we know that the phenomenon is common. What is worrying for the operators of properly licensed dormitories is how the requirements and conditions in the FEDB will inevitably lead to further increases in their own running costs that will be passed on to the consumers.
The fear of this happening is that while the increase in cost of compliance applies to the larger dormitories that already practise higher standards today, the FEDB seems to leave the smaller operations to their own devices. The latter group will continue to serve a relevant purpose as I have mentioned earlier, and it is difficult to argue with a simple economic proposition that higher costs for larger, purpose-built dormitories will make smaller, cheaper dormitories held to a lesser standard even more attractive to the employers. In the long term, if this preference begins to take root and the concern is not addressed, the large operators are concerned that the uneven treatment towards these two groups might pull down overall migrant housing standards in general.
I would therefore suggest that our authorities guard against over-regulation of one segment of the industry and, as far as possible or appropriate, apply the standards and conditions as general as possible to all. The Minister has mentioned that actually there are already some existing regulations for the smaller operators. I would like to ask the Ministry why do they not just group all these regulations together under this Bill and apply it to all.
Madam, as the legislation is allowed time to take effect, I would also want to urge the Government to continue close consultation and engagement with the operators and migrant worker residents especially as well as migrant advocates, like the MWC, to quickly identify and address any negative trends that may develop. Madam, I support the Bill.
: Mdm Speaker, in between the First and Second Readings of this Bill – a period of two-and-a-half months – two stories about foreign worker accommodation in particular, caught the public eye. Both stories unwittingly put the importance of this Bill and the scope of the work ahead to better manage and look after the well-being of our foreign worker population into acute perspective.
On 6 December 2014,
The New Paper
reported that four Malaysian foreign workers who were employed as cleaners died in a fire at a Geylang Lorong 4 shophouse, in Singapore's worst fire in 10 years. Two firemen and eight other individuals suffered injuries from this blaze. The unit in question – reported to be an area only slightly bigger than 1,300 sq feet – had nine rooms, each equipped with bunk beds, a tiny kitchen and a toilet. The Malaysian
Star
newspaper,
Stomp
and a
TODAY
article reported that the premises was occupied by some 100 foreigners from China, India, Bangladesh and Malaysia, partitioned into 11 units of rooms, each occupied by about 10 people. The local Chinese paper
Shin Min Daily News
, on the other hand, reported that the affected unit of the three-storey walk-up apartment had 11 rooms, each occupied by up to eight workers, which makes for a total of about 88 people in a single apartment.
In a separate piece of news on 29 December 2014,
The New Paper
reported that eight blocks of HDB-managed flatted factories at Tampines Industrial Park A, comprising workshops, furniture manufacturers and warehouses, were operating as "a secret dormitory" for 1,000 foreign workers, in clear violation of HDB rules.
While these stories were headline-grabbing, other articles pertaining to our foreign workers continue to make the news. On 21 November 2014,
The Straits Times
reported that a spot check by the Migrant Workers Centre found more than 50 construction workers from Bangladesh and India crammed into two small apartments in Selegie Road, as enunciated most recently by Mr Yeo Guat Kwang. It is also reported that the men "slept shoulder to shoulder, amid rotting food and soiled clothes". The same article reminded readers that the paper had raised several reports earlier on unhygienic and overcrowded foreign worker housing, recounting of an incident at a Punggol HDB construction site where hundreds of workers had to use choked and broken urinals, and another story covering the plight of about 5,000 workers living at Tuas View Square in factory-converted dormitories infested with rats and mosquitoes.
A
Business Times'
story of the same month reported that of the 770,000 Work Permit holders, only 200,000 stay in purpose-built dormitories that this Bill will regulate, with requirements for a little less than double the amount. The rest of our foreign workers stay in a variety of places like the putatively illegal dormitories in Geylang and Tampines, and in HDB flats in some cases, and at temporary housing at construction sites, all unregulated by an omnibus act of Parliament – notwithstanding the spaghetti bowl of guidelines and restrictions governing such accommodation, from the URA, SCDF, PUB, BCA, NEA and the HDB.
During the Second Reading of the Employment of Foreign Manpower Bill in 2012, the Minister informed the House that in 2011, MOM conducted close to 800 inspections of premises used as foreign worker housing and that in 2009, enforcement action was taken against 1,800 employers for housing their workers in unacceptable conditions. A recent
Business Times'
article reported that the first half of 2014 saw 360 inspections. However, the large number of these continuing violations and inspections suggest that Singapore , a First World economy by any stretch, does not host a robust enough framework governing the housing of foreign workers, even as this Bill is the step in the correct direction.
Mdm Speaker, the Explanatory Note of the Bill defines "foreign employee dormitory" to mean a premise that provides accommodation for more than 1,000 workers. By this threshold, the Bill does not address the sort of accommodation at the centre of 6 December Geylang fire and the "secret dormitories" such as those in Tampines. I would like to ask the Minister what plans are envisaged to reduce this threshold number within the context of the Bill since it is explicitly suggested in the Explanatory Note and, separately, how this figure of 1,000 was arrived at, in the first instance, in view of the need for greater oversight, regulation and enforcement across this industry, than is currently the case.
Separately, a
Straits Times'
report of 19 August 2014 reported, rather oddly, that there were at least 5,000 empty beds still available at purpose-built dormitories that are covered by this Bill. The reason for this sudden turn of events was put down to more construction firms being permitted by the authorities to set up foreign worker quarters on the sites of major building projects, such as LTA and HDB sites. I recognise that manpower proximity to the workplace helps reduce costs for businesses, particularly construction contractors. To this extent, Government policies should support such considerations wherever possible. However, rendering such operational flexibility for businesses would have been an opportune time to introduce clear licensing requirements, regulatory standards and a penalty framework for such temporary foreign worker quarters. This would have greatly supported the contractors on the one hand, and improved the living conditions of foreign workers on the other.
In drafting this Bill, I would like to enquire if the Ministry considered, for example, introducing a separate category or categories of licensing for premises that operate as smaller foreign employee accommodation below the threshold number, so as to bring many more dormitories and places of accommodation for foreign workers under a licensing framework. Such a broad strategy would have been aligned with the purpose of this Bill, as spelt out in clause 4, which seeks to establish certain accommodation standards for foreign employee dormitories; for the appropriate mechanisms to ensure adherence to those very standards, and to promote the sustainability of, and continuous improvements in, the provision of services at foreign employee dormitories.
One possible way to support SMEs, and small businesses and contractors on the one hand, and the foreign worker community on the other, is for the Government to consider building and managing some dormitories for our foreign workers. For example, employers that employ 100 or less foreign workers, being more sensitive to cost pressures, can be eligible to house their workers in Government-built and operated dormitories which set the standard for the entire industry. The entry of the Government into the sector can be modelled along the entry of the Ministry of Education into the kindergarten business, which is to provide good pre-school education and, more importantly, to catalyse improvements in this sector. If deemed appropriate, a fraction of the foreign worker levy can be used to establish such dormitories with the subsidy for small companies that show real and sustained productivity improvements in their operations.
Mdm Speaker, Part 5 of the Explanatory Statement of the Bill states that the Minister, by way of subsidiary legislation, can determine that several buildings on different parcels of land can be regarded as a single boarding premises and whether all the beds therein are to be counted to determine if the total threshold number is attained. This is a positive move as it would prevent savvy operators who would nonetheless operate assiduously to work around the 1,000-bed threshold by all means, effectively negating Parliament's intent, for example, by creating sister companies through friends and families. I would like to ask the Minister whether the Ministry has determined how many additional dormitory operators are likely to come under this scenario, as spelt out in the Explanatory Note, and how many beds, so to speak, would come under the licensing framework as a result of this envisaged subsidiary legislation.
The Bill's intention to determine that several buildings on different parcels of land can be regarded as a single boarding premises should also attract potential investors. As recently as 2008, Avery Strategic Investments, an entity that was then 97% controlled by Morgan Stanley Real Estate, bought three foreign worker dormitories for $153 million when Jurong Town Corporation offered to sell these dormitories comprising a total of 13,544 beds. An officer of the minority shareholder, Averic Capital Management, was then quoted as saying, "As the Singapore economy grows, likely so will the dormitory business. We're hopeful the economy remains robust; then there will be more opportunities to invest in this asset class." About two-and-a-half years later, Morgan Stanley sought to exit the dormitory business, citing a dearth of sites made available for dormitory development by the Government, preventing them from enlarging their portfolio to spin off the business into a dormitory real estate investment trust. It was reported that the entity received expressions of interests ranging from $375 million to $450 million, a whopping $100 million more than the total cost of assets it purchased a mere three years earlier.
Mdm Speaker, it is not in doubt that the market is the lifeblood of any society. However, for industries and sectors that have significant socio-cultural implications for an urban and high-density society like Singapore, the market approach should go hand-in-hand with responsibility towards our foreign workers. Apart from the dizzying dollars churned by the financial industry and the heady world of mergers and acquisitions, the concern of many Singaporeans and Members of this House, by virtue of this Bill, is primarily over the health, safety, security and safe lodging of our foreign workers.
To this end, in the Ministry of Manpower's press release on the Bill dated 4 November 2014, under the section covering penalties, it was stated, and I quote:
"The holder of the dormitory licence will be the dormitory operator responsible for the day-to-day running of the dormitory. Nonetheless, the premises may be owned by a separate proprietor who either sublets the premises to the operator for use as a dormitory; or appoints the operator to manage the daily operations on his behalf. In such instances, we [the Ministry] will hold proprietors accountable where they, rather than the operators, have more control, for example, in making repairs or alterations to the premises."
I seek some clarifications on this point in the press release since the Bill does not make specific reference to the degree of control as apportioned between, for example, the ultimate owner of a foreign employee dormitory and the licensed operator in the event of an infraction. For example, how far would an owner or a corporate entity be held liable if it can prove it had no control in making repairs and alterations to a boarding premise? Does that mean it is not responsible should foreign workers be found living in unsatisfactory conditions?
The interpretation section of the Bill defines a "proprietor" as "includes the owner of the premises who is the lessor or grantor of the licence to occupy". Specifically, I would like to ask the Minister, how far does ownership extend, as defined by this definition? Would it cover financial institutions and funds that are the ultimate owners and who seek to unlock value in such investments? In keeping with the purpose of the Bill as made out in clause 4, would it not be less ambiguous and in keeping with the parliamentary intention of the Bill to make the licence holder and the owner or owners, regardless of their shareholding, jointly and severally liable for any infractions committed by the licence holder? A clarification of this point, in view of the Ministry's potentially ambiguous press release of 4 November, would be appreciated.
Mdm Speaker, this Bill is about providing for certain standards of accommodation and to promote the continuous improvement in the provision of services at dormitories, then I would argue that a firm enforcement regime that emphasises responsibility for foreign workers up and down the value chain be enshrined by this Bill and enunciated by the Minister. This is especially so since big corporates can potentially come on board and purchase strategic stakes in foreign employee dormitories as investors. The benefits of such a prospect should not be only to unlock shareholder value. I would argue that the benefits should flow back to industry and to society, and align itself to the purpose of this Bill. In some cases, the financial heft of big corporates and holding companies and their ability to undertake independent risk assessments put them in a good position to be the quasi-regulators of this industry, by virtue of ownership, alongside the Dormitory Association of Singapore.
In conclusion, Mdm Speaker, while I support the Bill, which seeks to regulate some aspects of foreign worker accommodation in Singapore, I fear it may be a half measure and rendered otiose if there is no parallel strategy to better regulate foreign employee accommodation
per se
– targeting not just big dormitory operators but the small-time businesses as well. Such an approach would be fairer and serve regulators and businesses better too, as it would not unwittingly penalise honest businesses which operate large dormitories that this Bill will regulate who play the game by the rules, and will do many Singaporeans a great service by improving the lot of our foreign workers. If Singapore manages to scale up its standards of foreign employee accommodation, our businesses are likely to attract higher quality workers and significantly lower the risk of another tragic and senseless fire in Geylang or potentially wanton violations of statutory regulations, as evidenced by the secret dormitories in Tampines.
:
Order. I propose to take the break now. I suspend the Sitting and will take the Chair again at 4.15 pm.
Sitting accordingly suspended
at 3.50 pm until 4.15 pm.
Sitting resumed at 4.15 pm.
Debate resumed.
: Mdm Speaker, this Bill seeks to regulate operators of foreign employee dormitories with a new licensing framework to manage larger purpose-built dormitories with self-contained facilities to meet migrant workers' social and recreational needs outside work. It is a step to complement the various existing measures to manage foreign workers housing. Mdm Speaker, I welcome this timely, long, overdue Bill.
Madam, foreign workers play a very important role in our society. They do the jobs which many locals would not or cannot do because of the poor working conditions of long hours and low pay. I am sure Members of this House will agree that without them, our economy might run to a standstill.
In order to recognise their contributions to the nation, it is important for us to uphold their rights and take care of their interests and welfare while they are working in Singapore. For a developed nation which boasts of having one of the highest GDP rates in the world, the way we house our foreign workers leaves much to be desired.
Way back in 2008, the then Minister for National Development, Mr Mah Bow Tan, had told the media that there were between 80,000 and 100,000 foreign workers who did not have proper housing. Why did we allow a floodgate of these migrant workers to work in Singapore without ensuring and giving them a decent place to live in? Was it an oversight or poor planning?
NGOs I have spoken to such as the Humanitarian Organisation for Migration Economics (HOME) have told me that many foreign workers who approached them for assistance, live in conditions which are crowded, dirty and full of pests such as cockroaches, bed bugs and rats.
Are there slums in our First World Singapore? Yes, by looking at the living conditions of many of our foreign workers. It is ironic to find foreign workers being housed in such appalling conditions while at the same time, working hard to earn meagre salary, with no minimum wage, to build luxury apartments and bungalows for Singaporeans and expatriates.
A
Straits Times
report by the dormitory association of Singapore have revealed that there are approximately 200,000 bed spaces in purpose-built dormitories. According to MOM statistics, there are approximately 770,000 foreign workers in Singapore. Where are the rest of the 570,000 living? About half of them are Malaysians, who commute to work daily across the Causeway. But the rest of the workers are likely to be housed in factory converted quarters, shop houses, private apartments, bungalows, and construction sites which are often poorly managed without proper supervision and likely to be at the mercy of their own employers. Our liberal immigration policies have affected the welfare of the foreign workers themselves.
In order to save on costs, many employers will squeeze foreign workers, sometimes 10 to 15 of them in a small room with hardly any space to move around, although URA regulations stipulate that walk-up apartments and shop houses should not accommodate more than eight persons in one unit. By going into any apartment and shop house in Geylang and Little India, one will find these regulations widely flouted.
The problem has existed for many years but little has been done. Enforcement of existing housing standards is inadequate to ensure that such overcrowding does not happen. Overcrowding can be fatal as we have seen from the recent tragic deaths of four Malaysian workers and eight injured last month when a Geylang shophouse caught fire.
Housing standards vary across different types of housing. For instance, the standards which have been set for workers living in permanent buildings under construction are far lower than that for workers living in temporary buildings on worksites.
I would also like to ask the Minister whether it is legal for construction workers to live in buildings under construction which may take two to three years to complete.
Buildings under construction are often dusty, sandy and often pest infested with inadequate sanitation, with inferior bath and shower facilities. I have heard of dengue outbreaks which have affected construction workers at these sites. The regulations for such housing are minimal and far lower than that of purpose-built dormitories and temporary housing structures.
For example, in BCA's "Use of Buildings under Construction as Workers' Quarters Regulations 2008" only ensures that the building is structurally safe and the rooms workers are housed in, are of sufficient height and land space. Standards of ventilation in the regulations are vaguely worded. Sanitation facilities are inadequate.
The Code of Practice in Environmental Health stipulates that there should be one toilet bowl, one wash basin and one shower for every 25 male workers whereas International Labour Organization standards stipulate that the same facilities should be available for every six persons. Are our current codes and regulations in compliance with international standards with regard to worker's welfare, comfort and hygiene?
I urge the Government to review our existing legislation.
Workers living under permanent buildings under construction also do not have adequate electricity at night and are usually not protected in the event of a thunderstorm. There are no facilities such as lockers for workers to store their personal belongings and there is hardly any privacy for them.
It is also common for workers who are living in buildings under construction to be housed in the basement. When it rains, the area in which they are living in will flood. I urge the Government to re-consider allowing such forms of housing.
The Foreign Employees Dormitory Bill relies on existing regulations with regard to ensuring adequate living standards for foreign workers. They are mainly the Building Control Act, the Control of Vectors and Pesticides Act, Environmental Public Health Act, Fire Safety Act and the Planning Act.
One of the key features of this Act is the setting out of the licence conditions for a dormitory operator. I am happy to see that the licence conditions include provisions which concern the physical, mental welfare and security of foreign workers, including their meals. Standards concerning bedrooms, bathrooms and standards to prevent overcrowding are also mentioned in the Bill.
Clause 11, under conditions of licence, I would like to ask the Minister whether he will consider making licence operator keep a register of all the occupants and also to submit a monthly report to MOM.
However, these standards which will have a positive impact on their well-being are not defined. How does this Bill for instance propose to look into the mental welfare of foreign workers, since it is one of the criteria? Counselling should be made available to cater emotional needs and others.
Provisions should also be made to facilitate privacy and proper sleep for the workers, for example, lights and music should be switched off after 10.30 pm.
I am also concerned that without clear guidelines and standards, enforcement officials will enforce these provisions arbitrarily. What safeguards are there to ensure this does not happen? Who will police the licence operators? Is there a hotline for migrant workers to complain?
As described earlier, accommodation standards for foreign workers vary across different types of housing. The Bill would have been a good opportunity to standardise accommodation standards for our migrant workers across different housing types, such as factory converted dormitories and worksite housing. What are the reasons for not considering it? Also, are our existing provisions in the Acts listed is sufficient to ensure they are properly housed and taken care of?
A comprehensive Bill for dormitories would ensure consistent standards in terms of structure of the housing, proper beddings, adequate ventilation, sanitation, number of persons per room, security of belongings, sufficient privacy, laundry and cooking facilities, waste management and access to health care.
Does the new law also apply to smaller dormitories? While we see these conditions for purpose-built dormitories as the "favoured" migrant worker housing solution for the future, we urge authorities not to overlook smaller dormitories. I am glad the Minister had addressed this issue when he introduced the Bill earlier.
We also urge the authorities to build more dedicated migrant worker recreational centres in areas with larger clusters of dormitories not covered by the bill, ensuring the availability of right amenities and services to our migrant workers, regardless of the size of their dormitory accommodation.
I am also deeply concerned about the powers which have been given to dormitory inspectors in this Bill. Who is the dormitory inspector and what is his role? How will he or she be trained? The Bill mentions that if the dormitory officer or inspector believes that any offence under this new Bill has been committed, he or she may break open any door or window of the premises for inspections. He or she also has the power to arrest and detain someone for up to 48 hours. Why does the Bill give such broad powers to inspectors when we already have existing legislation such as the Criminal Procedures Code (CPC), and the Police Force Act? According to section 25 and section 7 of the Bill, not having a licence to run a dormitory is an arrestable and detainable offence. What kinds of offences under this proposed Bill could be so serious that it is necessary for such actions?
I would like to ask the Minister where are the workers in the marine and process sectors including chemicals and pharmaceutical sectors going be housed when HDB flats are no longer allowed to house them after May 2015, which is only a few months away. The new larger purpose-built dormitories will only be ready in two to three years' time.
The new housing framework will lead to rising costs of doing business and in turn higher rentals. Is there a way to cap rentals from escalating, to prevent shortcuts in the housing standards for migrant workers?
In conclusion, the Bill is a step forward in its right direction for the Government to continue its enforcement on the new licensing framework policies and to achieve overall improvement on the welfare of the migrant population. I would also like to thank all those involved in the policy making of this Bill.
Mdm Speaker, we must change our mindset and treatment towards migrant workers and treat them as guests, by helping them to improve their basic working living conditions, and in turn, it will lead to better productivity and skills, which will benefit Singapore in the long run. Thank you.
: Madam, I declare my interest. I work in a local bank, which provides financing for foreign workers dormitories. Thank you for allowing me to join this discussion.
Presently, all foreign workers' accommodation has to meet regulatory standards set by no less than five Government agencies, namely Urban Redevelopment Authority (URA), the Singapore Civil Defence Force (SCDF), the Building and Construction Authority (BCA), the Public Utilities Board (PUB) and National Environment Agency (NEA). These comprehensive rules set minimum space allocation, fire and structural safety, environmental health and hygiene, water and sewage standards to ensure the safety and well-being of workers.
However, in reality, enforcement of these standards has been a challenge. As there are so many foreign worker housing all over our small island, regular inspections of all of them are not possible. Errant employers and housing operators take advantage of this and their workers' helplessness to flout the law with impunity. Violations have been persistent and range from overcrowding to fire safety.
Hence, I agree with the government's decision to increase the number of Purpose-Built Dormitories (PBDs). Monitoring the standards of these PBDs will be more practicable and sustainable.
However, employers are naturally concerned that such a decision might favour dorm operators and lead to higher business costs. They are worried that with no alternative accommodation for their employees, they would be at the mercy of dorm operators. Would the Ministry consider setting up an independent council similar to the Public Transport Council to regulate pricing of dorms so that operators will compete instead on non-price factors?
This Bill encompasses additional regulations for dormitories with 1,000 or more beds. They address the management of public health and safety issues, security and public order issues and the maintenance of social and commercial facilities and services.
While I support these additional measures, I would like to ask the Minister how the figure of 1,000 was arrived at. Whether it is a smaller dorm with a few hundred residents or a bigger one with 1,000, similar problems could arise. In the event of an infectious disease outbreak, racial or national tension, for example, the tipping point can be reached at 100 or 200 workers. In any dorm with a couple of hundred workers from a wide mix of countries, there should be measures to ensure harmonious living.
Should the hundreds of thousands of workers housed in smaller dormitories, especially those within worksites, not be protected as well by the new regulations? In addition, how will it be possible for the Ministry to ensure a level playing field for all dormitory operators with different requirements for dorms of different sizes?
Next, I would like to check if it is compulsory for Work Permit holders working in certain sectors to be housed in PBDs. If this is indeed the case, what the reasons are. Mdm Speaker, in Mandarin, please.
This Amendment is targeted at dormitories with 1,000 beds or more. Should the Government also consider setting a limit on the maximum number of beds for these facilities?
This is because we must make sure if a conflict unfortunately breaks out, the Government can quell the unrest effectively, in the shortest possible time, so that workers staying there and the managers are safe.
In my view, congregating the dormitories at one location or spreading them to different places, each has its pros and cons; same with putting the majority of workers up at one dorm or separating them at different dorms.
How to balance? The two is very important.
Besides guidelines on hardware facilities, "software" issues such as the proportion of dormitory staff and managers to boarders, and the staff training is also important.
The communication between the dormitory staff/managers and the boarders is important, so is the care and concern shown towards the workers. This can effectively prevent unhappy incidents from happening and will help employers raise productivity.
Every now and then, we would hear about how awful the living conditions of some foreign workers' dormitories are. Unscrupulous employers and dormitory owners, in order to profit, knowingly put up the workers in over-crowed, unhygienic and unsafe dormitories, taking advantage of the fact that the workers are not familiar with Singapore and helpless. The reason why we keep seeing this kind of problems is because the possibility of being caught is low and the punishment is not severe enough.
This Bill is in tandem with the long-term measures taken by the Government. At the same time, MOM should conduct surprise inspections, and mete out punishment accordingly against those who flouted the rules and make sure employers to comply. Hope we can effectively solve this thorny problem once and for all.
Madam, I support the Bill.
: Mdm Speaker, thank you for allowing me to join this debate. This Bill is an important move to regulate accommodation for foreign workers, and I support it. However, I have two specific concerns which I would like to seek the Minister's clarification on.
First, given the significant impact that large foreign employee dormitories could have on the welfare of their occupants, the condition of the immediate vicinity, as well as the general state of the neighbourhood in which it is located, I am concerned that none of these factors appear to have been explicitly included in the licensing conditions.
At the moment, the licensing conditions do not require feedback from either dormitory occupants, current or intended, the residents of the surrounding community, or any assessments of the impact on the immediate vicinity.
I see that clause 13(c) does specifically include "serious disruptions to the community" as grounds for the Commissioner to issue a compliance directive. But that appears to imply that the preceding anomaly, such as a complaint, would be required as a trigger.
Mdm Speaker, I am suggesting that accounting for such potential impact on the community should be built into the licensing requirement so that operator is required to proactively seek community feedback as part of the conditions for renewal of licence. I am suggesting that such conditions be explicitly imposed. I am aware that it could impose additional costs on operators, which would ultimately have to be borne by employers. However, I believe that what we want is a system that will stand us in good stead for the longer term. Hence, I believe that this would be in line with the purpose stated in clause 4(c) of the Bill.
If the regulatory burden on operators is too heavy, it will encourage flouting of the law. On the other hand, inadequate oversight will lead to a mismatch between the burden borne by employers and that borne by society. Although a balance has to be struck, it should be better to anticipate the natural concerns of the community hosting a dormitory, rather than to react to them only when they arise.
Ultimately, if operators find that they need not care for the vicinity in which the dormitory is located, the costs will be transferred to the neighbourhood, which will only increase negative perceptions and threaten the sustainability of such facilities.
My second concern is about the threshold number, which a number of hon Members have already spoken about before me. I appreciate that the Minister had already emphasised that smaller dormitories are not exempt from regulations. I hope you will allow me to press this point on the grounds that there are concerns that I feel exactly about the uneven treatment. Since a significant proportion of workers are housed in smaller dormitories which would be exempt from this Bill, I would like to ask if the Minister has any concerns about possible unintended outcomes. Is it the intention to impose a heavier regulatory burden on operators of larger dormitories?
This raises other issues. First, operators will be subject to different standards, depending on their size and the enforcement could become, therefore, correspondingly more onerous. Second, if employers gravitate towards smaller dormitories because of this loophole, this could encourage the sprouting up of such smaller facilities.
As I had noted above, my concern is that when accommodation standards are unacceptable, this increases the overall cost that would have to borne by society.
On a different note, I would like to express my strong support for the Ministry's decision to allow operators a transition period in moving to these new standards. In fact, I would like to echo Assoc Prof Fatimah Lateef's point earlier that perhaps we should consider allowing an even longer period of adjustment. What we are stipulating are standards that we should not compromise on once they have been met.
In conclusion, I want to urge the Ministry to ensure that enough resources are allocated to enforcement. Accommodating large numbers of foreign workers carries a cost to society as a whole. It is the responsibility of employers to fully price such costs into their operations. Workers need to be taken care of according to standards that the social conscience of Singapore today requires. Very often, the social cost of accommodating low-wage workers are hidden from view and not properly accounted for. In that sense, poor quality conditions in accommodating foreign workers often push the cost to society. Thank you, Madam.
: Madam, Singapore depends on foreign workers for many jobs especially in the construction, process and marine industries. Most of these are jobs that Singaporeans do not want to do, but which are necessary for providing the services and infrastructure that help improve the quality of life for Singaporeans and to keep our economy growing.
Many Singaporeans take pride in the magnificent skyline of Marine Bay and the country's iconic buildings, such as the public housing project Pinnacle@Duxton -- the first one in the world to have two sky bridges linking the seven towers.
Indeed, most Singaporeans live in HDB flats which are continuously being upgraded. But we know that these would not have been constructed in the first place had it not been for the thousands of foreign workers toiling day and night to build them brick by brick, sometimes risking life and limb.
We owe it to our foreign workers to ensure they are provided decent living conditions in Singapore and are not vulnerable to exploitation on account of their weak bargaining power and their willingness to suffer hardships just to work here.
Their main purpose for coming to Singapore is to earn money to create better lives for themselves and to send back to their families the money in their home countries. With this their top priority, many of them are reluctant to report any abuse of their poor living conditions, out of fear of losing their jobs and being sent home.
Many of the foreign workers here have no problems with their housing but it is unconscionable that, despite Singapore's progress as a First World city and their contribution to its growth, a proportion over the years has been found holed up in cheap and makeshift shelters with conditions akin to a Third World slum. We continue to read reports of such abuses today, as has been highlighted by other Members before me.
I know that the Manpower Ministry takes seriously any breach of the various regulations which protect the rights of our foreign workers. It is indeed assuring to know that MOM has been conducting inspections of foreign workers' dorms and cracking down on housing violations.
I share the Ministry's stand that, in the longer term, it is better to house work permit holders in purpose-built dormitories where there are self-contained facilities to meet their social and recreational needs outside work. Such well-equipped dorms, if run well, would provide foreign workers with a better living environment and the motivation to give their best in their jobs here. Like other human beings, they have their legitimate needs and aspirations, to rest, to play and to be treated with dignity and respect.
This Bill is a significant move in laying the groundwork for realising this larger vision. But in the short term, we have to address the fact that, despite the availability of such purpose-built dorms for years, some employers have shunned them, preferring to house their foreign workers elsewhere, including rat-infested makeshift shelters.
One obvious reason for this is cost. Employers are, above all, driven by cost considerations, especially given the significant increase in foreign worker's levies over recent years. They keep costs as low as possible to maximise profits. It costs $300 to $350 per head for purpose-built dorms, without including the transport. It costs much less to house them anywhere else, especially on- site.
Currently about 200,000 foreign workers are housed in smaller dormitories below the 1,000-bed threshold -- including those situated within work sites. So, for example, if you take the construction sector, it is much cheaper to house them on- site in uncompleted buildings or temporary makeshift quarters. MOM in fact allows this, as long as they comply with the various requirements such as fire safety, and providing adequate and proper sanitary and bathing facilities.
This is an entirely rational decision, especially for large projects involving thousands of workers as it reduces the need for the workers to be ferried to and from their workplaces and also reduces traffic congestion on the roads.
It also makes economic sense: the average salary for foreign construction workers is between $450 and $600 a month. Very low pay, with very low status. Their foreign workers' levy ranges from $300 to $950, depending on their skill levels. The numbers add up.
What incentive does the employer have to house their low-wage foreign workers in the high-cost purpose-built dorms, when they can get away with cheaper if sub-standard ones. This is especially so for subcontractors involved in smaller-scale projects operating on tight margins.
I would like to ask the Minister: given the current realities, what assurances there are that first, employers would house them at the purpose-built dorms even if more were built; and second, that the employers would not try to pass on the higher cost of such housing to the foreign workers by squeezing their salaries.
How would the market equilibrate? Evidence suggests that for such matters, it cannot be left to the dictates of the free market. One way is to regulate the fee structure of the purpose-built dorms so that prices will come down to a level that would provide a level playing field. After all, the Government gives funding assistance to existing dorm operators to retrofit their dorms to meet the Government's new higher standards.
To add another safeguard, it should be made illegal for employers to pass on the cost of accommodation to the Work Permit holders, just as it is now illegal to pass on the cost of the foreign worker levy and insurance premiums to them. There should also be a tightening of the permits granted for new quarters on construction sites and factory-converted dorms.
The Manpower Ministry should also conduct regular spot checks and enforce stringent standards with deterrent penalties imposed on housing violations, whatever the size of the dorm. These penalties were doubled only two years ago, when the Employment of Foreign Manpower Act was amended in November 2012. Employers found guilty of failing to provide acceptable accommodation can be fined up to $10,000, and/or jailed for up to 12 months. But since then, how many employers have been prosecuted under the Act with deterrent penalties?
I am aware that checks and inspections are labour-intensive, and MOM's manpower resources are stretched. But I echo the concerns expressed by other Members on the need to pay even closer attention to smaller dorms where the most egregious housing violations tend to take place in tandem with these additional regulations for larger dorms under this Bill. In other words, pay more attention to the smaller dorms even as we enforce this Bill.
It is good to see the media taking on the role of a watchdog on this issue, staking out suspicious sites and exposing them. The newspapers seem to have received quite a few tip-offs from members of the public. I hope that this will have a salutary effect on employers.
But MOM needs to beef up on its enforcement, so that the public can have confidence that it will also take prompt action on a tip-off. That said, it is unrealistic, however, to rely on tip-offs for large dormitories which are closed to members of the public. Even I as a Member of Parliament have no access. I tried to gain access to a large dormitory recently with a polite request for a visit to discuss community engagement but was denied.
This leads me to my other concern: that purpose-built dorms may become very restrictive places for foreign workers to live, confining them with strict rules governing their hours and their behaviour, especially with the additional licensing requirements under this Bill. It is important to guard against the danger of the purpose-built dorms becoming more like a prison or a labour camp, rather than a temporary home for guest workers.
We know that there is resentment among some quarters in Singapore against the presence of foreign workers in shared public spaces. But we must send a very clear signal to all that the construction of purpose-built dorms is to provide more decent housing for Work Permit holders with better facilities and space; it is not to render them invisible to the public eye or to completely cut them off from society. Already, it is a tough life for them here - they work six to seven days a week, often under hot and difficult conditions that not many Singaporeans would put up with. They are entitled to their rest with some freedom of movement.
We should shape the attitudes of employers towards them with all the levers that the Government has at hand. They are guest workers. They are not slaves. Negative attitudes, if left to persist, would also have repercussions in the wider society. Already, there seems to be an increasing divide between Singaporeans and foreign workers in our midst. Nasty comments both ways are not uncommon in the social media. These should be discouraged, and the deeper issues addressed. The Government is already tightening the inflow of foreign workers, to the point that some companies have to close shop in Singapore and move elsewhere. Despite the pain felt by businesses, the Government must press on with the economic restructuring to operate at a higher level with higher productivity.
To attract more Singaporeans into the industries which rely on foreign workers, such as construction and F&B, the wages must be increased, and the working conditions and processes improved. It is also important to change the public perceptions towards these jobs as low status jobs. With these changes, attitudes towards foreign workers and the jobs that they do will also change. This will make for a more united Singapore: open, decent and fair to all.
In conclusion, Madam, as we celebrate Singapore's 50th anniversary and look with some pride at all that we have achieved, let us recall the role played by foreign workers over the years. Let us ensure that they are trained well, treated well, and housed well. Hopefully, when they go back to their home countries eventually, they will have good memories of working in Singapore, and be our ambassadors in portraying a good image of us as a society. With that I support the Bill.
: Mdm Speaker, I am pleased that the Government is addressing the concerns on the poor living conditions and overcrowding in foreign worker dormitories. This Bill will certainly hone in on the current shortcomings on housing for foreign workers who come here to work, and also ensuring that concerns of Singaporeans who live near to these dormitories are also looked into.
In Chinese, there is a saying, “又要马儿跑， 又要马儿不吃草”. It means that "You can't expect the horse to run fast when you don't let it graze". But let me clarify that the reference to horses is not meant to be taken literally. Rather it is to appreciate the hard and long hours that these workers have been putting in each day to help us realise our infrastructure developments.
If we want our construction projects to be completed on schedule and with efficiency, it only makes sense that we protect the basic rights of these contributors with adequate and proper living quarters where they can rest well after a day's hard manual work, relax and be comfortable.
I am in support of the Bill, but I believe we can do more. Firstly, why are only large dormitories with 1,000 or more beds subject to licensing? How did this magic figure come about? I would think putting a few hundred people under a roof is a sizeable crowd. It poses challenges to manage even with just 50 people under one roof, from fire safety, cooking area, toilets to space for clothes. Failure to manage the living quarters of a few hundred people can certainly give way to problems in terms of public health and safety, security and public order.
I wish to ask the Minister how many per cent of our workers are living in large dormitories with 1,000 or more beds. I strongly believe that we should lower the threshold for the Bill to include smaller dormitories to ensure these workers have a safe and hygienic accommodation during their stay in Singapore.
Without proper supervision, there may be some errant dormitory operators who comfortably slip past licensing requirements. It is certainly nothing to stop an operator to put 999 workers and thus escape scrutiny.
Last October, there was a report in
The Straits Times
on the living conditions at some factory-converted dormitories. There were workers who complained of being plagued by mosquitoes, rats and ants. I would be surprised if they are not infested with cockroaches and bed bugs. They had nowhere to store their groceries and food. There was no proper space to dry their wet clothes and uniforms. Windows are sometimes boarded up which meant poor ventilation. Will this Bill cover such dormitories? Will this Bill prevent such things from occurring again? Definitely not, as most such factory dormitories are less than 1,000-bed capacity.
Let us take this opportunity to examine the overall welfare of our foreign workers.
Next, not all employers are open to housing workers in purpose-built dormitories. It is more cost-effective to house them in cheaper on-site facilities. Due to the limited space and lack of amenities, these facilities tend to become cramped and unsanitary. Thus, I believe such facilities, though they house fewer foreign workers, would still need to be subject to monitoring as well.
I propose making it compulsory to provide additional frequently used amenities, such as free Wifi, TV and proper storage facilities, and recreational corners if space permits. Many own smart phones to keep in touch with their families back home.
Free Wifi would certainly come in handy and save them some expenses. Instead we often see them squatting along the road side or areas where they can tap on free Wifi. Some have taken to going to HDB void decks and commercial buildings to tap on the free Wifi, for example.
Mdm Speaker, in Mandarin, please.
: Mdm Speaker, in the past few years, Yishun GRC, especially Yishun South, saw many new construction projects and BTOs coming up, very much like bamboo shoots springing up after the rain. While it is good to help young people to fulfil their dream of home ownership, some residents are disturbed by the constructions.
Residents often told me that every night they would see foreign workers lingering around their void decks. Some workers would leave large amount of trash behind such as cigarette butts and beer bottles.
As Singapore's largest developer, HDB perhaps should take the lead to ask the contractors to provide free Wi-Fi at the workers' dormitories and some basic recreational facilities. These will not only keep the workers at their dormitories but also reduce the inconvenience to nearby residents.
We can also provide training and seminars for foreign workers to better understand and integrate into our culture. For example, short courses on not littering, safety guidelines for pedestrians and cyclists, laws and customs, will reduce the friction between the locals and foreign workers.
I also received many feedbacks on foreign workers driving on our roads. Many residents feel that it is too easy for foreign workers to convert their driving licence into a local one. They feel that due to the differences in driving behaviour, culture and road conditions, foreign workers should take some driving tests before they are allowed to convert their licence. This will improve our road safety.
Mdm Speaker, I support this Amendment Bill.
Mdm Speaker, I rise in support of the Foreign Employee Dormitories Bill. I am heartened by the introduction of this new licensing framework which seeks to regulate operators of foreign worker dormitories. Under the new Foreign Employee Dormitories Bill, dormitories for foreign workers with more than 1,000 beds will need to be licensed from the second half of 2015. Under the proposed Bill, operators or proprietors must obtain a licence to run the dormitories and this is over and above existing regulatory standards and requirements.
The imposition of new conditions and requirements through this new licensing framework is laudable. I welcome this move as we must ensure our foreign workers have a proper living environment which caters to their well-being and health while at the same time ensuring the local community where they reside in close proximity is not overly inconvenienced by their presence in numbers.
Foreign worker dormitories have a huge impact on their surroundings. This is especially so when these dormitories are located near to residential communities. The proposed Bill aims to ensure safety, security and public health in the vicinity where these dormitories are housed. I spoke on this challenge last year in Parliament and I am glad that this new Bill has been introduced.
On behalf of Nee Soon GRC and, in particular, my Nee Soon East constituency, there are several flats within proximity to two existing foreign employee dormitories, namely, Simpang Lodge 1 and Lodge 2, located at Yishun Avenue 7. During my weekly house visits and grassroots events, I have gathered feedback from residents as well as grassroots leaders living within a stone's throw from the lodges on some of the social dis-amenities which they had to contend with. I will attempt to share some of the challenges faced, what are the actions taken by us thus far and suggestions moving forward in light of this new piece of legislation. I would classify them into three broad categories, namely (1) Safety and Security, (2) Environment and (3) Transport.
The first challenge faced by residents who live at the HDB blocks within close proximity involves safety and security issues. These include congregation at void decks and open grass patches, public consumption of liquor, illegal tapping of Wifi, and cycling on pedestrian footpaths. All these create a sense of insecurity and concerned parents become worried for their daughters and children who come home in the evenings or late at night.
The second challenge involves the environment. The congregation and activities at HDB void decks and open patches has resulted in littering, with drink cans, bottles and packaging left behind as well as noise which affects the peace and quiet in the neighbourhood at night.
The third challenge involves transport in that they fuel the overcrowding of feeder service 811 during peak hours. Although the majority of foreign workers living at Simpang Lodge 1 and 2 have company-provided transport, the remainder do not have company- provided transport. As such, they utilise the feeder service number 811 located nearest their dormitories daily to get to Yishun bus interchange and Yishun MRT station. This further exacerbates the already well-utilised service 811 as many of our Yishun residents, including students, use that feeder service each morning to get to school or go to work. The overcrowding occurs during peak hours in the morning and crowding at the bus interchange in the evening for the return trip.
I am glad to share that we have formed a task force a year ago. In the past 12 months, our Nee Soon East grassroots team have been working closely with several Ministries and Government agencies, they include, amongst others, MOM, MND, BCA, HDB, Nee Soon Town Council, NEA, MHA/Singapore Police Force (SPF), and LTA. The taskforce sought to address the three broad challenges shared thus far.
In the area of safety or security, police officers from the neighbourhood police centres have stepped up patrols including deploying plainclothes officers to maintain law and order. Auxiliary police officers have also been deployed at the areas of possible congregation to carry out foot patrols. Targeted enforcement against errant cyclists who ride on pedestrian footpaths has also been taken. Our grassroots volunteers also perform Citizens on Patrol to augment the forces. Police CCTVs have also been installed at the lift and staircase access points of the HDB blocks in proximity and CCTVs deployed at alcohol sales locations. We have also asked the dormitory operators to provide free Wifi.
With respect to environmental issues, the task force and, in particular, MHA/SPF, grassroots, Town Council, NEA and Migrant Worker Centre have also carried out numerous events and engagement sessions at these two dormitories to educate them on the laws, cultures and social norms, and help them assimilate into our country and neighbourhood. In my visits during these events and sessions, I can see that the workers are supporting our drive.
As for the SMRT feeder service transport overcrowding issue, I am glad that LTA has added extra runs the past year and other interventions like the peak period short service and a new service 803 to cater to BTOs along the route. However, we still receive feedback on crowding and we have since deployed bus ambassadors at those bus stops to ensure commuters move to the rear of the bus and queue up to board in an orderly manner.
Despite initial successes, I urge all the partners especially MOM, MND, BCA, MHA/SPF and LTA to continue the good work of the task force by helping and supporting the grassroots volunteers to sustain the efforts. I submit that there be a single point of contact so that our grassroots need not have to deal with so many multiple agencies. I urge also that alcohol sales and con4sumption be better managed including areas in the neighbourhood and community.
In particular, I hope even more can be done to further mitigate the 811 feeder service crowding. In fact, I just did house visits to the three affected blocks two days ago and the residents there shared that the safety and security and environment issues have improved but quite a number still encounter long waits and overcrowding of bus service 811 during peak hours as well as on weekends. This is further exacerbated by the fact that there is bunching of buses as well as commuters not moving to the rear. I submit and recommend that a 811 peak period service dedicated solely to those two bus stops within proximity to the Simpang Lodges, or a new bus service be catered to alleviate the load.
The proposed Bill assures us that the authorities have a proper system in place to tighten the control over the challenges caused by large foreign dormitories. From a worker-centric point of view, one of the gaps of this proposed Bill is that it does not cover dormitories with less than 1,000 beds such as those located within worksites. I know there are large number of foreign workers living in dormitories smaller than 1,000.
I urge MOM to fill the lacuna by bringing these smaller dormitories within the auspices of this new Bill. In the interim, I urge MOM to continue scrutinising these smaller dormitories and not let our guard down.
Nonetheless, I am glad to note that the Bill provides for the "threshold number" of 1,000 to be replaced with a lower number by the Minister publishing a gazette notification if and when needed. I am also encouraged in that this Bill will also mean dormitories can be required to provide dedicated recreational facilities within these dorms to provide the workers with breathing space and also ease the load off neighbourhood community facilities.
In conclusion, at the end of the day, we want to move towards a system where migrant workers are treated with dignity. We want to help them become socially integrated and adapted to our society through understanding our cultures, behaviours, customs, attitudes and laws. Having this new licensing framework is a good start as a good environment in these dormitories will go a long way to increase their productivity and new conditions will help eradicate the social dis-amenities and enhance the overall living environment of the foreign workers and the residents living in close proximity to these dormitories. I support this Bill. Thank you.
: Mdm Speaker, I rise in support of the Foreign Employee Dormitories Bill. It is disquieting to hear of cases where foreign workers, usually Work Permit holders, have had to endure overcrowded and unhygienic housing conditions, when their unscrupulous employers flout the law. Workers have been found shoehorned into cramped shophouses, apartments and temporary dorms, living in conditions that many of us would consider uninhabitable.
I am pleased that the Government intends, over the long term, to house all Work Permit holders in Purpose-Built Dormitories (PBDs), where there are self-contained facilities to meet the workers' social and recreational needs outside work. These will not only cater to the lifestyle and recreational needs of the foreign workers, but will also help preserve communal space for Singaporeans, and minimise the impact of large concentrations of foreign workers on neighbouring local communities.
I had called on the Government to pursue this very approach during the 2013 COS debate, and am thankful that they have taken decisive action in the form of regulatory provisions, the building of more foreign workers recreation centres and the rapid increase of bed supply in purpose-built dormitories.
The Foreign Employee Dormitories Bill requires dormitories with 1,000 or more beds to meet licensing conditions covering a wide range of areas from public health and safety, security and public order issues, to provision and maintenance of social and commercial facilities and services.
Mdm Speaker, clause 29 of the Bill states that every foreign employee dormitory to be deemed a public place, for purposes of enforcing laws on drunken behaviour. I am concerned that curbs on consumption at the dormitories will mean drinking at other places around the dormitories. This will cause great inconveniences to local communities in the neighbouring estate. Can the Minister please clarify how this risk can be mitigated?
I support the security requirements for dormitory operators to implement computerised access systems, CCTVs, segregation gates to isolate disturbances to within the dormitory compound, and an Emergency Response Plan to deal with potential public order incidents. I am also pleased with the requirement for sick bay isolation facilities to contain any infectious disease outbreak, which could spread quickly in a densely populated dormitory.
However, given the size and footprint of purpose-built dormitories, I would like to ask the Minister what measures, other than those required of the operators, will be put in place by the various Government agencies to prevent and mitigate security and public order issues, if and when they arise from these large concentrations of foreign workers.
Madam, despite the best efforts to provide for the foreign workers' needs in their dormitory compounds, it is inevitable that many will feel the need to venture outside the dormitories, into the nearby local estates. I would like to ask the Minister what planning parameters are used to determine how foreign workers' dormitories should be sited in Singapore, how the impact on local residents is assessed, and what additional resources, such as law enforcement officers, are then deployed in neighbourhoods close to foreign worker dormitories.
I recognise that given Singapore's small size, it is inevitable that some dormitories will be sited near our local communities. I believe that providing transparency around this issue will help manage the expectations of Singaporeans who live close to such dormitories, and help them understand the situation. It will also help assure local residents to learn of additional measures taken by the authorities to mitigate any impact on their neighbourhood, security and lifestyles.
Madam, while I applaud the Government's efforts to set out comprehensive requirements for dormitory operators, complete with hefty penalties for non-compliance, this may also lead to dormitories being dominated by a few large players. Besides health and security measures, the proposed legislation requires dormitory operators to provide workers with comprehensive range of daily conveniences at the dorms, including minimarts, ATMs, regular events on Sundays and public holidays, and dedicated transport to and from the dormitories.
Marginal players or smaller players will be squeezed out by these onerous conditions and high investment requirements. The business of operating dormitories will need to achieve a certain scale to justify the building of these facilities expected of the operator. Both the dormitory owners as well as the operators may feel the need to build financial buffers to hedge against potential liabilities. As licences will only be valid for up to three years, it will also mean that capital expenditure will need to be depreciated over a relatively short period of time.
We should be cognisant of the cost structure in this industry and how they may translate to affordability issues for employers seeking dormitory beds for their employees. I would like to ask the Minister what safeguards he will put in place to prevent cost escalation and profiteering by a few large dominant players.
Foreign workers' dormitories are projected to house as many as 385,000 non-domestic non-Malaysian Work Permit holders – this is an infrastructure on a very large scale. Perhaps the Government should consider taking on the role of developer or proprietor of foreign workers' dormitories, so as to disintermediate, or remove one layer of commercial profit-making. Some commercial entities may be allowed to own and develop dormitories if they intend to operate the dormitories or are meant to house their own staff, as in the case of Keppel Corp and SembCorp. This approach offers the Government more control over the dormitories' "hardware", and the flexibility to choose qualified dormitory operators whose key focus will just be to run the day-to-day dormitory operations effectively and efficiently.
The new regulations are designed to minimise the impact of foreign workers' dormitories on neighbouring communities. Whilst many Singaporeans will welcome this, it is important that we do not inadvertently encourage discrimination and prejudice against foreign workers, or confine them to a ghetto, and restrict their opportunity to assimilate and appreciate Singapore's culture and way of living. We must continue to foster a sense of mutual respect between Singaporeans and these workers, who are here to do jobs we would rather not do, and to help build our economy. For example, in my ward, I have found it useful to involve workers from nearby dormitories in community events and projects, as well as join our Citizens-on-Patrol, as a means to understand each other better.
Madam, whilst I support having clear penalties to encourage good behaviour, as laid out in the Bill, the powers given to the Commissioner appear sweeping. In particular, the explanatory notes state that compliance directives may be issued to a licensed operator without the need for the licensed operator to be heard, and that non-compliance is an arrestable offence. We need to ensure that any such directives are issued are with transparency and fairness, and do not serve to discourage genuinely interested and qualified operators from entering this industry.
Likewise, clause 25 states that "A police officer or dormitory operator may arrest without warrant any individual whom the police officer or dormitory inspector, as the case may be, reasonably suspects is committing or has committed an offence under section 7." Here, again, we need to ensure that enforcement of this clause is fair and proportionate. I would also ask that dormitory operators and police officers be properly trained to conduct inspections with due respect and sensitivity towards dormitory residents.
In addition, as a multi-agency approach will be adopted to ensure that the Licensing Conditions will be enforced, the different Government agencies should work seamlessly, expediently and coherently together.
Mdm Speaker, in conclusion, it is heartening to learn from a recent survey that an overwhelming 90% of foreign workers in Singapore are satisfied to work here, 92% plan to continue working in Singapore, and 81% would recommend Singapore to friends and relatives as a place to work. Singapore continues to depend on these workers to build our infrastructure and support our economy. The Foreign Employee Dormitories Bill is a step in the right direction towards building living spaces where all residents, whether local citizens or foreign workers, can live and work together in comfort, safety and harmony. Madam, I support the Bill.
:
Minister Tan Chuan-Jin.
: Mdm Speaker, I would like to Mr Christopher de Souza, Mr Yeo Guat Kwang, Assoc Prof Fatimah Lateef, Mr Pritam Singh, Mrs Lina Chiam, Mr Gan Thiam Poh, Assoc Prof Randolph Tan, Ms Irene Ng, Er Dr Lee Bee Wah, Mr Patrick Tay and Ms Foo Mee Har for their views and their support for the Bill.
We all acknowledge the importance of the Bill as a progressive measure – a much needed measure – to provide the Government with additional levers to manage larger dormitories over and above current regulations. With that in place, we will be able to better designed dormitories and to deal with these issues upstream when we are designing the dormitories, so that we can ensure that we provide better living, social, recreational alternatives for workers. This will also help to facilitate the harmonious co-existence with our residents from the surrounding communities.
A number of Members raised comments on a broad range of issues, including employment standards and protection for workers. They are all important. I would like to again emphasise that the management of a foreign workforce is a very wide-ranging topic. A number of these measures are already in place. A number of major steps have been put in place in the preceding years. For example, the changes that have made to the Employment of Foreign Manpower Act represent a step in that direction.
I would address most of the concerns specific to the issues of the Bill which is about regulating larger dormitories, but I would also take the opportunity here to make some broader points about the state of foreign worker welfare in Singapore; it is from some of the descriptions and some of the points raised.
It is important for the House not to have the wrong impression that there is widespread mistreatment of foreign workers in Singapore. I do agree, for example, in various instances highlighted by a number Members – Mr Christopher de Souza, Mr Yeo Guat Kwang, Mr Pritam Singh, Mrs Lina Chiam, Mr Gan Thiam Poh and Ms Irene Ng – of workers being housed in poor, unhygienic conditions. I do know because I accompany my officers when they go for inspections and I have seen many of such similar cases.
Does it mean that every single accommodation in Singapore is in that fashion? No. Are there egregious cases? There are. But I would like to emphasise that these instances that we see, they are unacceptable; and in many instances, they already violate existing laws. Regulatory agencies will take to task any person found to have violated the prevailing standards and ensure that the affected workers are relocated to approved accommodations.
My officers are out every week inspecting, following up on leads, following up tip-offs. Many of these do not make it to the headlines. What you see represents some of the cases that have been highlighted, some have been tipped off to the media, some have been tipped off by public, some by the NGOs, and they are valid because there are these cases and many more that our people see. We do need to deal with them. But does it mean that across-the-board situation that is dire, as highlighted by Ms Foo Mee Har?
We have taken this issue on board. We have tried to make sure that we survey the foreign workers in a large enough sample to understand what are the conditions. Our survey showed that nine in 10 foreign workers are satisfied with working in Singapore, and an equally high proportion would recommend that their friends come here to work. Again, that does not mean that there are no egregious cases.
For example, in terms of existing regulations – in terms of enforcement – last year, MOM alone took more than 1,400 employers to task for providing unacceptable accommodation to their workers. We relocated close to 3,000 as a result of poor living conditions. We have prosecuted offenders in egregious cases. Other agencies, such as URA, NEA and SCDF have also taken errant premises owners to task of flouting existing regulations which cover areas such as illegal subletting, inadequate bathing and toilet facilities and overcrowding. As a Government, we are not only stepping up enforcement of existing requirements, but we are also continuing to review and to continue to raise these standards over time, and this is what we are going to do.
This Bill addresses one part of issue which is dealing with the dorms that are far larger. The rest of the other regulations continue to be in place and will continue to be tracked and will continue to be strengthened over time. In particular, housing types raised by Members, for example, on-site workers' quarters – that is one area that we are looking at as well. I would also add that the authorities are also watching the density and the use of these sites. Apart from managing the standards that are expected and required, we are also looking at what sites ought to be approved, where are the areas that ought to be approved, and as we build up more purpose-built dormitories (PBDs), we are also looking at being a lot stricter in giving approvals for the use of the use of various premises for housing foreign workers.
Let me also state this again about foreign workers being housed in dormitories. The dormitories are more relevant for non-Malaysian workers in the construction, marine and process sectors. This group forms only about half, not the whole of the 707,000 or so Work Permit holders in Singapore. Half of them are Malaysians. Many of them commute daily and do not need dorms, or are workers in the manufacturing and services sectors who may live in rented residential premises near their work places.
With regard to Ms Foo Mee Har's query on how the locations of dormitories are determined, the relevant Government agencies do take into account many factors, including technical and infrastructural constraints like suitability of roads, adequacy of sewers in the area as well as recreational and social amenities that the dormitory can support. I would also like to assure Mr Gan Thiam Poh that similar care is taken in determining the capacity for each dormitory as well as the number of dormitories allowed within an area.
This level of coordination is going on across Government agencies and we do continue to want to strengthen that. This may not always be apparent because this often takes place in the background. But this work will continue and we will continue to emphasise and strengthen the collaboration and co-operation across various stakeholders.
Mr Gan Thiam Poh also raised the issue of whether employers from specific sectors should be allowed to house their workers in better equipped purpose-built dormitories. While the Government's view is that the PBDs can better cater to Work Permit holders' housing needs, there are also merits to housing workers on or near to their work sites. For example, this would alleviate the need to transport them back and forth. There will be an impact on productivity. There will also be less loading on the public transport system during peak hours. Therefore, such non PBDs still remain a space in which we need to look at in terms of providing housing options provided they continue to meet the existing regulatory requirements on appropriate housing standards. Where these requirements are not met, where these standards are not met, we do urge the public, we do urge those who are aware of such violations to raise it. Our authorities will inspect and our authorities will inspect and take action. That is what a lot of officers do on a week-to-week basis.
Mr Christopher de Souza, Assoc Prof Fatimah Lateef, Mr Yeo Guat Kwang, Mr Patrick Tay, Mr Pritam Singh and Mr Gan Thiam Poh had also noted there is still a significant number of workers who are being housed in the dormitories that will not come under the ambit of this new Bill. This is one of the common concerns that have been raised by many about why only those dormitories above 1,000 beds; how about those that are less? They suggested lowering the 1,000-bed threshold to cover dormitories housing fewer workers. Assoc Prof Randolph Tan have also asked if concerns about unintended outcomes arising from the threshold had been considered.
To put things in perspective, the threshold of 1,000 beds will cover all existing purpose-built dormitories, and all the new purpose-built dormitories coming on-stream will offer 1,000 beds and above. That is where we are going with the purpose-built dorms. It is important for us to factor these requirements in upstream, so they be designed and to be worked in to the building of the purpose-built dorms; not just the physical infrastructure, but the way in which it has to be run. It does not mean that the rest of the space is not being regulated – they are. It also does not mean that we will not also look at whether to strengthen and how to strengthen the regulations for the smaller dorms or smaller accommodations which house fewer than 1,000 beds.
It is a considered decision. We had also debated why a 1,000 beds, should it less, should it be more. We looked at the spread of the different housing types and numbers that they house. We felt that, going forward, that is what we are going to do with PBDs – we are going to have a lot more of these and that why it is important for this Bill to move now rather than wait for a complete solution. The rest of the other measures will unfold with time as we look into it and to see how best to strengthen them.
Over time, as more PBD sites are launched, we will expect the proportion of foreign workers staying in larger dormitories within the threshold to increase. As I have mentioned earlier, we will also manage in terms of the permission given for contractors, for developers, in terms of requesting various sites to house their workers. As more of these PBDs come on- site, and we will also begin to take a stricter view about how workers are housed elsewhere. Therefore, you will begin to see a lot more of them shifting towards the PBDs.
There is, therefore, this need to manage upstream the different dynamics that come with a larger site. As I have highlighted earlier, the 1,000-bed threshold was selected because of the different challenges posed by such larger dormitories, as well as the fact that the requirements that we will impose such as outdoor recreation spaces and minimarts, for example, are only possible actually in larger dormitories.
For smaller dormitories – for smaller factory-converted dorms, for example, they may not have scale to be able to put in place some of these measures. There are other solutions, for example, we also encourage the building of recreational centres which cater to clusters. For example, there are areas where they, perhaps, may not be so many of such PBDs but there are housing facilities housing smaller numbers of workers, but there is a whole cluster of them who have needs to be met, and that is where recreational centres are being built to address those.
There are practical reasons why this is so. For example, we are aware of security concerns. We are also aware of healthcare concerns. For smaller dorms or smaller accommodation spaces, when outbreaks happen, you can manage it, you have quarantine. But when you have a much larger dorm, the requirements are quite different, the scale is very different. We need to weave this into the design of the dormitories themselves.
Instead of just lowering the threshold, the more practical approach we believe is to add on additional requirements for dormitories above 1,000 beds. I emphasise again: existing regulations continue to be there. They continue to be important. They continue to cover a wide range of the concerns that we have today, and they will be looked at and will continue to be strengthened over time. But for the many PBDs that are going to come on line – the existing ones and the new ones – we do need these additional requirements because the scale of those dormitories is quite different. These requirements will be on top of the existing levers which will continue to apply.
Having said this, we will also bear in mind the suggestion, the possibility of having different classes of licences in the future, should experience show that this is needed. Which is why the way the Bill is structured allows us to have the space to have different classes of licences and to be able to adjust the numbers accordingly, should the need arises.
Mr Christopher de Souza and Mr Pritam Singh were also concerned that whether operators can potentially escape licensing by sub-dividing their premises to fall slightly below the threshold of 1,000 beds; or as Er Dr Lee Bee Wah mentioned, "What about the 999-bed dorms". We have recognised this and we know that people are very creative. Whatever laws that we come up with, they will find creative ways to circumvent them.
For the vast majority of dormitories which will be government-tendered, the proprietors are obliged to provide enough bed spaces for a pre-determined number of workers. Any request for subdivision will be evaluated and will be subjected to approval by the relevant authorities. Moreover, we have made provisions in the Bill precisely to prevent this kind of gaming by empowering the Commissioner to deem a group of buildings, structures or facilities as one dormitory for the purpose of dorm licensing. We are fully aware that there is a likelihood, in fact, in our discussions with the various stakeholders with the dorm operators themselves, they themselves have also raised various questions, "What happens if we have this, that and the other?" This is where we share the same concern as you do, and we have worked it into the Bill so that we make sure we are able to prevent such gaming of the system.
Members such as Mr Yeo Guat Kwang, Mr Gan Thiam Poh, Assoc Prof Fatimah Lateef and Ms Irene Ng have commented on the affordability of PBD beds, in particular, dormitories may raise bed prices in response to the cost of meeting higher regulatory standards. The Government has also been injecting more land for development of PBDs over the last few years. As PBDs are completed over the coming years, more bed spaces are coming online in the next few years, we have reasons to believe that the dormitory operators will need to keep prices competitive to attract tenants. At the same time, as I had mentioned earlier, we are also watching the space in terms of permission granted for other types of dormitories being set up, housing of smaller numbers of workers in other types of accommodations.
Let me point out that the additional requirements to be imposed through this regime have been included in the tender conditions for new dormitories since last year. What it means is that the bidders of these sites must calculate the necessary compliance costs including the additional regulatory requirements of larger dorms as part of their overall business plans, and therefore, adjust the costs in their bids accordingly. This mechanism will also allow them to ensure that they do not just pass on the cost. Often times, if you overbid for a particular project, you will have to find ways to recover that. But when all these requirements are upfront, they will have to factor that in so that they bid accordingly. This will to help manage the cost and to ensure that they do not transfer it on to others, especially to the workers.
For existing dormitories which were not built to the new standards, as many of Members have acknowledged, it is important for us to allow some flexibility on a case-by-case basis when it is extremely difficult for the dormitory to comply. We will give time and we support their effort. For instance, there may be space constraints and it might just not be possible to provide sufficient outdoor recreation space. We will provide some form of financial assistance to retrofit existing dormitories to ease operators into the new framework and reduce the need to pass on the cost through higher bed prices. More details will be provided to the industries when these are finalised.
With regards to Ms Foo Mee Har's comments on the impact of the licensing tenure on the recovery of capital investments, dormitories with longer land leases may renew their licences if they comply with the licensing conditions and if the location continues to be deemed suitable for foreign worker housing.
Ms Foo Mee Har also asked about the other measures in place to mitigate contingencies involving security and public order. We kept such contingencies in view and consulted quite extensively with the relevant agencies, including SPF, MOH and NEA when formulating the licensing conditions. Many of the requirements imposed on the dormitory operators are devised precisely to facilitate the intervention of the relevant agencies in an emergency. We would also like to assure Ms Irene Ng that it is not the intention of the government to make dormitories restrictive places to live in. There are also extensive requirements pertaining to areas such as social and recreational amenities which ensure that dorms better meet the needs of the residents.
I would like to thank Mr Gan Thiam Poh for the suggestion to include other requirements in the licensing conditions. We worked closely with the Members on the licensing conditions and have incorporated their inputs where possible. The licensing conditions set the minimum standards that the licensed dormitories have to comply with, and are intended to complement the broader suite of foreign workers management initiatives that I had earlier mentioned. Nonetheless, we will encourage operators to provide additional services or amenities that best serve the specific needs of their residents.
Ms Foo Mee Har and Mr Patrick Tay also highlighted the importance of managing alcohol sales and consumption. In the upcoming Liquor Control (Supply and Consumption) Bill, which MHA has tabled, will deal with this issue.
Assoc Prof Randolph Tan noted the importance of ensuring that the new regulations are effectively enforced. I fully agree with that. Assoc Prof Tan can be assured that sufficient resources have been allocated to the task. On the other hand, I would also like to ensure Ms Foo Mee Har and Mrs Lina Chiam that we will not go overboard either, and that the powers of the Commissioner and inspectors will be exercised judiciously. They will have a wide range of tools and levers that can be calibrated according to the situation. For example, the offense of running a large dormitory without a licence is a particularly egregious one. We have, therefore, made this an arrestable offence.
It is also imperative that the Commissioner has powers to use compliance directives to respond effectively to disorder and risks to the dormitory residents' health and safety. In such exceptional circumstances, when time is of the essence, the Commissioner needs to have the power to direct dormitories to comply immediately with the necessary requirements, even if these have not been communicated beforehand. As many Members have shared, for instances of violations, we do take these quite seriously. The changes we have made in the EFMA in the preceding years, and some of these measures we are putting in place are to give the authorities more clout to be able to step in, in a much more decisive fashion. We are going to do the same for dormitories and housing arrangements for fewer than 1,000 workers.
Nonetheless, there will be appropriate appeal and review mechanisms, including for compliance directives and the modification of licence conditions under both normal and extraordinary circumstances. For instance, for the modification of licensing conditions, the Commissioner must give a notice period of at least 14 days, during which the operator may make written representations. Clause 13(2) also states clearly the circumstances under which the Commissioner may issue a compliance directive, for instance, when the dormitory has contravened a licensing condition.
We also recognise that from time to time, there are genuine issues on the ground that even the best of regulations might not have taken fully to account, particularly in areas where there are high concentrations of foreign workers. Agencies have, therefore, been working with Members and grassroots leaders to tackle the challenges on the ground, and we will continue with these efforts. I am glad that Mr Patrick Tay agrees that these interventions have helped alleviate the challenges faced in his constituency and we will continue to work closely with him to address the remaining issues.
On this note, I would also echo that whatever regulations we put in place, whether it is managing dormitories of 1,000 beds and more, or smaller, even in the present situation, we do see violations. My officers see violations every week. Are we able to eradicate them? It is probably difficult and probably not possible to say we can eradicate them completely. But we must endeavour to eradicate as much of them as possible. This is where we do need the strength of the regulations and the laws for us to be able to take action. We do need enforcement to be strengthened. That is something that we plan to do.
We have been carrying out enforcement and we do plan to step up efforts. We do need the community, just as in terms of managing the congregational issues that we face on the ground, we also need the community to provide us with information for us to act. We do receive many leads and so on, but we have also been on many wild goose chases. Times when we were given information, and we carry out the inspection and nothing is there. So, we also need to evaluate that. But information is important, whether through industry insiders, through members of the public, through the media, through the NGOs. It takes a community to play a part. When egregious cases are noticed, give us information and we will endeavour to act on it and take the necessary action.
Mdm Speaker, this Bill will enhance the levers to address the different dynamics that come with larger dormitories. This Bill also seeks to provide a good and safe living environment for dormitory residents, and manage the potential impact on surrounding communities.
This Bill does not address all issues pertaining to the management of foreign workers. It is meant to address a particular trend; it is to address dormitories housing more than 1,000 foreign workers, because that is where we are going with a lot of PBDs. Existing regulations are in place, we will continue to work on them, along with other measures to better manage our foreign workforce in order to better look after them. They play, as many of Members have highlighted, a very important role in building up Singapore, and it is our responsibility and duty to look after all our workers, whether foreign or local.
Notwithstanding what we see sometimes online, I do believe that many Singaporeans do appreciate the contributions of foreign workers. In fact, in many of the surveys and in many of the conversations I have had with foreign workers, many of them are happy here. It is not a perfect life by all means, but many of them appreciate the kindness and warmth shown to them by the many Singaporeans who they come into contact with on a daily basis.
I echo Ms Foo's sentiment that we do not, and should not, inadvertently encourage discrimination or prejudice against foreign workers. To address what some critics have, from time to time claim, it would be wrong to associate the steps that we are taking to make dormitories safer, more secure and better able to meet the needs the residents, with the xenophobic sentiments.
Once again, I do very much thank Members of the House for their support of the Bill. Many of the views that you echo and the concerns you have expressed, I share them wholeheartedly. As I have said, this Bill is meant to address a particular space. The space is a very large one. There are existing measures in place, there will be new measures and new initiatives put in place to further improve it and we look forward to Members' suggestions on how best to do that.
As several Members alluded to, we do want to manage the common spaces so that we, and our residents, whether local or foreign workers as well, can all live and work together harmoniously, and we look forward to working closely with employers and industry, who play a very important role in shaping this, and with the Members of the House to achieve this outcome. With that, thank you very much.
: Mdm Speaker, I would like to seek a few clarifications from the Minister. The Minister mentioned that the Bill targets those dormitories that are housing 1,000 workers and above. But this Bill's name is "Foreign Employee Dormitories Bill". Why do we not call the Bill the "Purpose-Built Dormitory Bill"? That is, we call a spade, a spade. It is still important for us to ensure that all the other dormitories are properly regulated. Because the fact that many Members have raised the concern, may I now ask the Minister if would he recognise that there is a big gap? In his reply, he mentioned that currently there are already a lot of existing regulations to regulate the other dormitories, but how are we going to enhance them?
I would also like to request for the Minister to answer my question: why do we not consider, like the Liquor Control (Supply and Consumption) Bill yesterday, where they grouped all the other relevant regulations into a Bill to make the whole regulatory regime more comprehensive?
: Mdm Speaker, it is important for us to understand that this Bill addresses a specific issue, which is how best to regulate the larger dorms, basically 1,000-bedders and above, because we are building purpose built dorms of that size. It does not mean there are no regulations in place; it does not mean that the present regulations governing the welfare of the foreign workforce are inadequate. There are, for example, in the many instances highlighted in the media, the egregious cases we have seen over the past couple of months -- in fact, over a long period, there have been various issues that have been cropping up -- all those cases violate existing regulations.
What we intend to do is to make sure those regulations remain in place. They continue to remain in place, even for the larger dorms. But the larger dorms bring with them a different scale, which is why it is important for us to provide some of these added requirements, because the scale adds a very different dimension to it.
Now, does it preclude that we, going forward, do not bring in some of these measures for some of the smaller dorms? It does not preclude that. Does it mean that we will not eventually have an over-arching Bill that brings in together everything? No, it does not preclude that either. What we are saying is that there are already a lot of measures in place, and continue to be in existence. We do not want to wait for this mother-of-all-Bill to cover everything, because it is pressing for us to address the 1,000-bedders and above, because these PBDs are coming online. We want the contractors and developers to build this into the requirements and to the design, of not only the physical infrastructure, but in the way in which they are run, so that the playing field is clear, so that all these things are fused in, so that we do not need to do this retrospectively. We will continue to be working on this space to improve the management of our foreign workforce, whether in terms of their working conditions or their working conditions.
: Thank you, Mdm Speaker. Just a quick clarification for the Minister – I made a point in my speech about penalties and how far would ownership extend if the owner or the proprietor could prove that it had no control, for example, in making repairs or alterations to a foreign employee dormitory. This is really with regard to the larger point about how far responsibility towards foreign workers should extend up and down the line. Thank you.
: Mdm Speaker, I thank the Member for the follow-up question. We will go after the owners of the assets. The point that the Member raised in his speech was about eventually going all the way up to even the stakeholders, investors and so on. But in this particular case, we want to deal with the owners of the assets, those who are managing the dormitories and take action against them.
: Mdm Speaker, I share the concerns raised by the hon Member Yeo Guat Kwang on the need to have a more comprehensive regulation that encompasses as well the smaller dormitories. I understand the Minister's point that the smaller dormitories are already governed by the existing regulations. But the concern that many Members here share is that while we have tough laws for the smaller dormitories, the enforcement may not have been as tough.
That is why one of the questions I raised in my speech was that within the last two years, ever since the Act had been tightened, the penalties have been increased for housing violations, how many cases have been brought to bear and with deterrent penalties on errant employers? While we have this new tough Bill for 1,000-bedders and above, we would like an assurance that the smaller dormitories will not escape the gaze of the Ministry of Manpower.
My other question is to clarify whether the Minister is saying that the direction where MOM is moving is towards encouraging, or maybe a gentle persuasion for, employers to go into purpose-built dormitories; or is he tightening the screws in terms of tightening permits for new quarters, squeezing out available options in the market for smaller dormitories so that they will be herded into purpose-built dormitories?
: Mdm Speaker, I am not sure "herding" will be the appropriate term to use in this context. But the idea is that, going forward, we will be building more purpose-built dormitories of that size. We would like to shift more of the housing accommodation needs for our foreign workforce into that sector. It does not mean that the need for some of these factory-converted dormitories (FCDs) does not exist. We do know there are also many FCDs, for example, that do need regulations and which are of a suitable standard to provide housing and accommodation for the foreign workforce. There is a reason for that, because housing them, for example, on-site, would actually be a lot more productive, would save a lot of time, I think for the foreign workers themselves as well. But the standards must be met.
As we go forward, as we build and provide more of this bed space elsewhere, we would also look at the approval process for the different accommodation for workers. For example, URA has also issued some guidelines on some of the areas. If we have a number of FCDs and we feel that the density has exceeded what we feel is comfortable, we will place a cap and basically not allowing further FCDs to be allowed on those premises.
But as we have more PBDs, we will begin to see more and more of our foreign workforce living in those conditions. And there are better controls, which is why it is important to bring about this Bill.
It is also important to understand – and I have emphasised this repeatedly – that bringing about this Bill does not mean that the accommodation spaces and the needs of the workers who are staying in dormitories which are smaller than 1,000 beds are not important. They continue to remain important, and it continues to be important that we not only just regulate but to regulate them effectively.
The reason why this Bill is in place is so that we can make sure that these measures and parameters are worked in early. The existing space for some of the smaller living accommodation and spaces do remain important. They are quite substantial in numbers and we do want to make sure that the regulations continue to be enforced.
What the Member raised is not about the regulations not being comprehensive. It is about enforcement. Is sufficiently effective? So, we recognise that. Enforcement is in place but we will step it up.
: Madam, I would like to ask the Minister about the point I raised about the risk of dormitories in the future being dominated by a few large players, given the comprehensive range of facilities that is required and also the investment. I have asked the Minister whether the Government would take on the role of a developer or the proprietor for foreign-worker dormitories so as to remove one layer of commercial profit making.
All the Government needs to do is focus on appointing people who are good in dormitory operations and these people do not have to have a lot of investments and they focus on the day-to-day operations of the dormitory, making sure they are run effectively and efficiently. So, maybe a little bit like going back to the old days of JTC building workers' dormitories so that this does not have to be – because I think the risk of the very comprehensive set of regulations and the hefty penalties may preclude some of the smaller players from coming into the space. After a few years they may be worried about having discussions about cost escalation and monopoly by a few large players.
: Mdm Speaker, I would like to thank the Member for her question and her concern. We will watch this space. I am not sure whether it is our role for the Government to step in to build these dormitories and to manage them. Whether the Government-linked companies, whether JTC steps in or not, that is a decision that they have to take. But we recognise the concerns that the Member has raised. It is something that we are fully aware of and we will track the developments as they go on.
:
Ms Foo, just keep it short, please.
Thank you, Madam. I just want to make sure the Minister does not think that I wanted the Government to run it. I just feel that the Government, perhaps, could build them to the specifications they want, but get operators to run it, so that the capital outlay is not very hefty, so more players can come in, so the competitive force can come in. Thank you.
[(proc text) The House immediately resolved itself into a Committee on the Bill. - [
]. (proc text)]
The Chairman
: The citation year "2014" will be changed to "2015", as indicated in the Order Paper Supplement.
Clauses 1
to
35
inclusive ordered to stand part of the Bill.
Bill reported without amendment; read a Third time and passed.
Resolved, "That Parliament do now adjourn to
Thursday, 29 January 2015.
" — [
.
Adjourned accordingly at 5.56 pm
to 29 January 2015.
asked the Minister for Trade and Industry what measures is the Ministry looking into to help businesses, in particular the SMEs, adjust and cope with rising costs while they are still embarking on productivity improvements which will take time to show results.
: As part of economic restructuring, the Government has provided continued support to SMEs to upgrade their capabilities and improve productivity through schemes such as the Productivity and Innovation Credit (PIC), Innovation and Capability Voucher (ICV) and Capability Development Grant (CDG). We are seeing some encouraging developments and positive results from these initiatives. In a recent survey conducted by the Singapore Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SCCCI), 90.3% of surveyed companies have adopted productivity measures in 2014, compared to 83.9% in the previous year. Another survey conducted by DP Information Group in 2014 showed that a growing number of SMEs are pursuing productivity improvements and investing in new technologies.
The Government has been actively engaging SMEs to raise awareness and to help them apply for different government grants and assistance schemes. We have collaborated with Trade Associations and Chambers (TACs) to set up a network of 12 SME Centres, to assist SMEs from different parts of Singapore. The SME Workgroup, comprising representatives from the government and private sector, has also been reaching out to SMEs to gather feedback and explain how the companies can benefit from different government schemes. Some initiatives which we will be implementing based on industry feedback is to facilitate the participation of SMEs in government procurement tenders by publicising more information on how SMEs have successfully bid for such tenders, and to work with Singapore Business Federation (SBF) on a fair to increase awareness of the available opportunities.
To date, more than 22,000 companies have benefitted from the productivity initiatives introduced by the National Productivity Council (NPC). Export-oriented sectors registered healthy productivity growth of 2.1% per annum from 2010 to 2013, which is significantly higher than the 0.2% per annum growth for the overall economy. These sectors accounted for 56% of value-added in Singapore’s economy. For other sectors, including retail, food services and construction, the Government will continue to work with companies and industry associations to raise productivity and improve efficiency. We have to persevere with these efforts as sustained productivity improvements are essential for Singapore’s economy to remain competitive, and to provide good jobs for Singaporeans.
The Government has also taken steps to manage cost increases affecting SMEs. For example, rentals for industrial space have been moderating, following our release of more land and space over the past few years. In 3Q 2014, the rental indices for overall industrial space and multiple-user factory space fell by 1.3% and 2.3% respectively, on a year-on-year basis. This is the first year-on-year decline since 2010. There will also be a steady supply of industrial and retail space in 2015 and 2016, which will help to exert downward pressure on industrial rents and land prices. In addition, we are improving the transparency of rental data for industrial, retail, and office space, which will provide more information for SMEs to make their leasing decisions.
The Government will continue to support our SMEs on the economic restructuring journey, to help them become more competitive and productive. This requires the collective efforts of all parties, including government, employers and workers. We will also actively engage SMEs and gather their feedback on how Singapore businesses can benefit from new growth opportunities through internationalisation, innovation and collaboration.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources (a) whether regulations and enforcement on animal feeding are adequate to address irresponsible behaviour that results in proliferation of rats and mosquito breeding; and (b) how does the Ministry balance the wants of animal lovers in the residential areas to continue to feed and the need to feed in a responsible way that does not result in unwanted pests or inconvenience to others.
: Food that is left on open ground or improperly disposed of causes the proliferation of rats, cockroaches and other vermin. The containers with stagnant water also allow mosquitoes to breed. Consequently, irresponsible feeders who do not clear away the leftover food after feeding of stray animals may be fined up to $2,000 for littering under the Environmental Public Health Act.
Managing the danger posed by irresponsible animal feeding requires a collective effort by Government agencies, animal welfare groups and the public. The health and safety of humans must remain paramount. We hope the public will understand and support these measures.
asked the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs whether the Ministry will consider giving an award/grant to families of the Ministry's uniformed service officers who have died while in service since 1965, in recognition of the officers' contributions to nation-building and as part of SG50 celebrations.
: Home Team officers put their lives at risk every day to protect Singapore and Singaporeans. We value and appreciate them for the important contribution that they make to keep Singapore safe and secure. We remember and honour our officers who passed away in the course of duty in several ways such as the award of medals, posthumous promotions, and ceremonial funerals. We also provide assistance and financial support to their families. We know that this will never be enough for the huge sacrifice they have made, and hope that the recognition and support will be a source of comfort for their families.
The Singapore Police Force also remembers and pays tribute to its officers who have lost their lives in the service of the nation during the annual Police Day, with the observance of a minute of silence.
In our SG50 celebrations this year, we will commemorate the contributions of our officers who have lost their lives in the course of duty. The Home Team will also have a series of events to honour, thank and remember our pioneers. Our Home Team pioneers were instrumental in fighting many serious threats during our critical nation building years – communist terrorists and assassins, violent crime, secret societies, industrial and student unrest, Konfrontasi, racial riots, drugs and major fires. They laid the foundations for the safe and secure home that we enjoy today.
Through these events, we hope that the younger and future generations of officers will be inspired by their courage, dedication to duty and sacrifice.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources (a) how do the 2014 readings of the Pollutant Standards Index (PSI) compare with those recorded for 2013; and (b) whether progress is made towards achieving clearer skies and better air quality with the enactment of the Transboundary Haze Pollution Act.
: Using the new PSI incorporating the PM2.5 readings which the Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources (MEWR) introduced in April last year, our air quality was in the ‘Good’ and ‘Moderate’ range for 353 days in 2014, and 350 days in 2013. We continue to be affected by transboundary haze from the region. The number of hotspots detected in Sumatra and Kalimantan in 2014 was in fact higher this year, – 28,580 hot spots compared to 18,129 in 2013. We were only spared poorer air quality because the wind conditions were favourable to us.
This is why MEWR enacted the Transboundary Haze Pollution Act on 25 September 2014. The Act is not a silver bullet and we do not underestimate the challenges of implementing it. Nonetheless, the enactment of this legislation has focused domestic and international attention on the haze problem, and placed errant companies on notice that their irresponsible actions will attract prosecution.
3 Regional cooperation within ASEAN remains a critical pillar of the ultimate solution. Local enforcement by local authorities at the sites of the fires is essential. MEWR and NEA will continue to work closely with the region’s authorities and Non-Government Organisations to resolve this recurrent regional problem collectively.
asked the Minister for Manpower how will the drive towards a more productive economy be made sufficiently flexible to accommodate manpower-intensive industries such as the construction industry and those industries that are heavily dependent on foreign workers.
: MOM understands that foreign manpower needs differ across sectors. We have catered for sector-specific needs by applying different Dependency Ratio Ceilings to the five broad sectors – Construction, Manufacturing, Services, Marine and Process. In general, higher Dependency Ratio Ceilings are granted to industries where the nature of work tends to be relatively unattractive, as locals are less inclined to perform these jobs. For instance, both the Construction and Process sectors enjoy a very high Dependency Ratio Ceiling of seven foreign workers for every local worker hired. We have also provided flexibility in industries where there is an essential economic or social need on an exceptional basis. This explains why we have specific provisions for industries like conservancy and healthcare.
While some flexibility is accorded, we cannot afford to entrench our dependence unsustainably on large numbers of low-skilled foreign workers. For the industries that many of us perceive to be "manpower-intensive" and "heavily dependent on foreign workers", we should ask ourselves whether such industries are similarly labour-intensive in other developed countries. Often, they are not, with reliance on technology or self-service instead. The higher productivity level of such industries then allows higher wages to be paid.
So we must change the nature of work of many labour-intensive industries to be manpower-lean. Even if it is difficult to attract locals to do such roles, it should still be done with fewer foreign workers, who have good skill levels. Manpower-intensive industries such as Construction can rely on less manpower once a better quality workforce is built up. Our recent announcements, such as mandating a minimum R1 proportion in the Construction sector from 2017 onwards, support this shift.
A productive economy has to be well supported by an experienced and highly skilled workforce. I strongly urge all industries and firms to invest in raising the quality of their workforce and other productive technologies in rising up to our productivity challenge.
asked the Prime Minister (a) whether there is a rise in occurrences of rude and confrontational behaviour towards public servants, in particular front line staff and nurses; (b) if so, what are the reasons for this; and (c) what are the most common occurrences.
: Good service delivery to citizens is important to the Public Service. It works best where there is mutual courtesy and respect. I am happy to note that while there are reported cases of abuse, the vast majority of service interactions between members of the public and public officers are conducted in a courteous and professional manner.
The frontline agencies with significant public interactions include the Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority (AVA), Central Provident Fund Board (CPFB), Housing and Development Board (HDB), Inland Revenue Authority (IRAS), Ministry of Manpower (MOM), Ministry of Social and Family Development (MSF) and National Environment Agency (NEA). Among these seven agencies, there were 45 cases of harassment or abuse reported to the Police in 2014
1
. This was an increase from the 25 cases reported in 2013. Among the restructured hospitals, there were 31 reported cases in 2013 and 34 cases in 2014. The Public Service receives more than 5 million service requests through physical channels each year. The incidence of abuse should thus be seen in this overall context.
The majority of these cases are incidents of verbal or physical abuse, which amounted to intimidation and obstruction of public officers in performing their duties. In some instances, members of the public turned abusive when their requests or appeals were turned down.
We take a serious view of abuse of public officers, and the more severe cases of abuse will face criminal prosecution under the Protection from Harassment Act which was passed by this House on 13 March 2014. The Act extended protection from harassment for public officers to include public service workers who deliver public services that are essential to Singaporeans’ daily lives, such as nurses working in our restructured hospitals. It also provides for increased penalties to reflect the seriousness of harassment against public officers and public service workers when they are performing their duties. Our public service officers and workers endeavour to serve Singapore and Singaporeans well. We will continue to protect them from abusive behaviour that prevents them from performing their duties.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) whether major construction works on the North-South Expressway (NSE) will commence in 2015 as scheduled; (b) whether the exact locations of the 16 entrances and 17 exits along the corridor have been confirmed and, if so, when will they be made known to the residents along the NSE corridor; and (c) how will the LTA manage road traffic in the Ang Mo Kio area when major construction work begins as there are two MRT stations in the vicinity currently under construction.
: The North-South Expressway (NSE) is a major project and will be carried out in phases over a number of years. The detailed engineering study is ongoing and requires more time than initially envisioned due to the complexity of the project. Thereafter, LTA will conduct the tender for construction, which will take about six months. Thus, construction will likely only commence in 2016.
The locations of all the entries and exits for the NSE are available on LTA’s website. The construction area of the NSE will not overlap with that of the two MRT stations. Nevertheless, before construction works begin, LTA will carry out traffic impact assessments and engage affected stakeholders on mitigation measures. For roads that are affected by construction works, lane for lane replacements will be provided wherever possible. Even with these mitigation measures, some inconveniences are inevitable and we seek the public’s understanding.
asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs (a) since the launch of their "Fox Hunt" campaign in July 2014, whether the Chinese government has requested Singapore to assist in the extradition of Chinese nationals who are suspected of corruption and the return of ill-gotten gains seized; and (b) if so, how many cases are there.
: It is our policy, in line with international practice, not to comment on whether a foreign government has made a request for legal assistance on specific cases, whether for international criminal cooperation or extradition matters.
China has stepped up its anti-corruption efforts. Its President and top leadership have expressed their determination to combat corruption wherever it may occur. While fighting corruption is a long term challenge, its success in this area will be a tremendous boost to its development and stability. China’s anti-corruption efforts have been welcomed by foreign investors.
In Singapore, anti-corruption is equally important to us. We maintain a firm and principled stance against corruption and other financial crimes. Singapore is a responsible and effective member of the wider international cooperation network in combatting transnational crime. For example, amendments to the Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act (MACMA) were passed by Parliament in July 2014 to enhance mutual legal assistance and facilitate greater international cooperation against transnational crime. Singapore also proactively shares our experiences with other countries at various fora, such as the APEC Anti-Corruption and Transparency Experts’ Working Group.
Should foreign countries such as China require our assistance, including in the area of asset recovery, Singapore is prepared to study the merits of the specific request. We will continue to cooperate closely with all our partners on this front, in accordance with our domestic laws and international obligations.
asked the Minister for Manpower whether the Ministry will consider reviewing the present pay-outs under the Work Injury Compensation Act with the inclusion of PMEs and all employees in the Act.
: The Work Injury Compensation Act (WICA) offers a no-fault, expeditious and low-cost route to compensation for any injury arising out of and in the course of employment. To ensure that payouts under the WICA remain relevant, my Ministry will conduct regular reviews on its compensation limits to account for changes in nominal median wages and healthcare costs.
We had increased WICA’s compensation limits twice since the Act was expanded to cover all employees in 2008 and the last increment was made in 2012. We are in the midst of our three yearly review of the compensation limits and will announce more details once the review is completed.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) what are the safeguards which are required of developers to be put in place during the construction of buildings near densely populated residential areas that minimise the health and environmental hazards to residents nearby; and (b) what recourse can residents take should the developers fail to undertake these measures diligently.
: It is the duty of the contractor overseeing the construction site to ensure the construction has minimal impact on the residents. There are regulations in place to minimise the health and environmental impact of construction.
Under the Building Control Regulations, prior to project commencement, the contractor has to carry out a pre-construction survey to assess the existing conditions of the buildings and structures, which are in close proximity to the building works. This survey would be used to determine whether the construction works have affected the surrounding properties.
During project implementation, the Building Control Act requires contractors to erect protective hoarding around the site boundary to prevent construction debris from posing a hazard to the public and the environment. Measures must also be in place to minimise any soil movement which could affect the environment. For construction works that cause vibrations, the contractors have to ensure the vibration level is within the recommended limits based on international standards and practices. These are specified in the Code of Practice.
Contractors must comply with the maximum permissible noise levels regulated by NEA. To meet these noise standards, contractors could put in place measures such as setting up noise barriers. In addition, NEA imposes the no-work rule on Sundays and Public Holidays in construction sites that are located near residential and noise-sensitive premises, such as hospital.
In addition, the Environmental Public Health Act requires construction sites of contract sums exceeding $10 million to employ an Environmental Control Officer to anticipate and eliminate situations which could result in environmental health problems, eg, mosquitoes breeding.
BCA and NEA regularly share good practices with the industry through seminars. BCA has also put in place the Green & Gracious Builders Scheme to promote environment protection during construction, and to recognise contractors who do so.
Residents can provide feedback on building safety to BCA and on environmental health issues to NEA through their hotline numbers which are displayed on signboards at the construction sites. And if the contractor flouts the rule, the contractor could be fined or prosecuted in court under the specific laws.
asked the Minister for Manpower whether sufficiently tough penalties are in place to deter companies from posting discriminatory job advertisements and unfairly replacing Singaporeans with foreigners.
: The Ministry of Manpower (MOM) takes a firm stance against discriminatory employment practices. All employers are expected to consider Singaporeans fairly by complying with the Fair Consideration Framework (FCF) and the Tripartite Guidelines on Fair Employment Practices.
MOM does not hesitate to take action against employers who are found to have discriminatory employment practices. Last year, MOM investigated and took action against 150 firms for having discriminatory employment practices. Some were given stern warnings while others had their work pass privileges curtailed for up to two years. We might also name and shame these employers. One example is Prime Gold International Ltd after investigations revealed that the firm discriminated against Singaporean employees by unfairly replacing them with foreigners. There has been a couple of high profile cases highlighted in the media recently. I would like to assure the House that my Ministry has looked into the cases and will take the necessary action when investigations are completed.
Besides acting on complaints, we also proactively identify and engage firms with disproportionately low share of Singaporeans compared to other firms in their industry. We have identified some firms with shortcomings in their HR practices and required them to implement an action plan to address these shortcomings. We also scrutinise their work pass applications closely.
However, enforcement alone cannot be the only way to address the issue of unfair and discriminatory employment practices. We have complemented our enforcement action with the Tripartite Alliance for Fair and Progressive Employment Practices (TAFEP)’s promotion and education efforts. Our current approach has worked well. Companies that were approached by MOM and TAFEP have generally responded positively and are supportive of upholding fair employment practices. For unresponsive and recalcitrant employers, we are prepared to take further action where necessary.
To conclude, let me emphasise that there is no place for employment discrimination in Singapore and the current penalties in place are sufficient to deter such practices. We will continue to monitor the situation closely and will review our approach if necessary.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) what is the rationale for imposing a higher interest rate for home owners who take a third housing loan from HDB; (b) what is the income profile and circumstances in which a person will be granted a third HDB housing loan; and (c) whether the interest rate can be equalised regardless of the number of housing loans taken.
: HDB provides up to two concessionary rate loans to eligible flat buyers, with interest rate at below market rates over the long term. Under exceptional circumstances, HDB may grant a third housing loan but it will then be at the market rate. Typically, this is for those who are in urgent need of housing, but due to poor credit records, are unable to secure a bank loan even though they have a steady income.
Providing a third housing loan at a higher rate is to discourage churning of resale flats. However, for genuine hardship cases, HDB may help with a concessionary rate loan, if the case merits such consideration.
asked the Minister for National Development whether lifts in newer HDB flats are designed to accommodate an ageing population that may require wheelchair access and ambulance stretchers to quickly evacuate emergency cases using the lifts; (b) what proportion of existing HDB flats are not able to accommodate ambulance stretchers or to move deceased persons easily; and (c) whether the Ministry will consider enhancing lift regulations to accommodate the above in future lift upgrades.
: BCA’s Building Control Regulations stipulate that in buildings with lifts, at least one lift has to be designed to allow the access of wheelchair users with a minimum internal lift car dimension of 1.2m by 1.4m. In practice, the lifts in newer HDB residential blocks are larger than 1.2m by 1.4m, and can accommodate a wheelchair, or an ambulance stretcher in an inclined position.
The Building Control Regulations do not require the lifts to fit stretchers in a flat-lying position.
Currently, about 15% of lifts in HDB residential blocks can accommodate a wheelchair, but not an ambulance stretcher in an inclined position. But in most of these blocks, there will be some lifts which are big enough to do so.
Enlarging the lifts beyond what is stipulated in the Building Control Regulations is constrained by the size of the existing lift wells.
asked the Minister for National Development whether the Ministry will consider having toilets or signs for nearby public toilets in all park connectors.
: NParks has built about 240km of park connectors, which will continue to grow. Due to their extensive nature, amenities such as benches, shelters, fitness equipment and toilets are provided at selective sites where they can better serve park users.
For existing park connectors, NParks is currently working to improve the signages that direct visitors to the nearest toilet facilities, such as those located at nearby shopping malls, food centres and petrol kiosks. These signages are currently placed at strategic spots such as the junctions of the cycle tracks and gathering points.
Where toilet facilities are not available within close proximity to the park connector, NParks will study the feasibility of putting in such facilities, such as where pocket of spaces are available. Going forward, the new Round Island Route (RIR) development, which is an expansion of the Park Connector Network, will also incorporate toilet facilities at appropriate locations.
asked the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance whether the Working Mother's Child Relief and Foreign Maid Levy Relief can be extended to taxpayers who are single mothers and, if so, what is the estimated tax savings for this group of taxpayers.
: The Government provides support and a range of benefits to families for the care of children at different stages of a child’s development, in areas such as childcare, healthcare and education. A number of these benefits are provided regardless of their parents’ marital status and extend to single mothers. These include centre-based infant and child care subsidies, Medisave grants for newborns and Medishield coverage for congenital and neonatal conditions.
The Working Mother’s Child Relief and the Foreign Maid Levy Relief which Mr Seah asked about are intended to support married women who remain in the workforce and raise their children within the context of marriage. They reflect the prevailing societal norm where marriage is the first step towards family formation.
The tax savings arising from both reliefs would depend on the individual circumstances of the taxpayer. As single parents currently do not claim for these tax reliefs, we do not have sufficient data such as on whether they have children who are studying full-time and their incomes if the children are working, to accurately estimate the tax savings arising from the reliefs.
asked the Minister for Communications and Information and Minister-in-charge of Muslim Affairs (a) for each year from 2012 to 2014, what is the Primary 1 student enrolment figure for each of the full-time madrasahs; and (b) what are some of the measures that MUIS has put in place to encourage such enrolments.
: On average, Madrasah Alsagoff Al-Arabiah enrolled about 30 Primary 1 students each year from 2012 to 2014 whereas Madrasah Al-Maarif Al-Islamiah enrolled about 67 students and Madrasah Al-Irsyad Al-Islamiah, which is under the Joint Madrasah System (JMS), admitted about 204 students each year during the same period.
Madrasahs Aljunied Al-Islamiah and Al-Arabiah Al-Islamiah ceased taking in Primary 1 students from 2009 when these madrasahs became part of the Joint Madrasah System, under which they only take in secondary school students.
Madrasah Wak Tanjong Al-Islamiah did not enrol any Primary 1 students between 2012 and 2014. Under the Compulsory Education (CE) Act, our full-time madrasahs are required to meet the annual PSLE benchmark in order to continue to admit students at Primary 1, and Madrasah Wak Tanjong Al-Islamiah did not meet the benchmark in the assessment period of 2008 to 2010. Madrasah Wak Tanjong Al-Islamiah has since met the benchmarks and has started admitting students at Primary 1 in 2015.
The madrasah education system requires primary students to take five additional Islamic subjects on top of the four PSLE subjects. The madrasahs conduct admissions tests to ensure that students who they enrol will be able to cope well with the demands of the curriculum. In total, Primary 1 enrolment of the full-time madrasahs caters for up to 400 places.
MUIS, together with the madrasahs, are committed to providing a quality education for our madrasah students. Besides recruiting and retaining quality teachers, MUIS also invests in the professional development of madrasah leaders and teachers.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) how are the season parking rates for Class 3 passenger vans determined; (b) whether the length and height of the passenger van is a determining factor; (c) under what circumstances will a Class 3 passenger van be required to pay the parking rates of a heavy vehicle; and (d) whether there is a different parking rate for the aforementioned vehicle types in properties administered by URA and HDB.
: The rates are based on the unladen weight of the van. Those below 1,800kg in unladen weight can be parked in normal car lots at the season parking rates for cars. Heavier vans are not allowed to be parked there for safety and environmental reasons. However, HDB exercises some flexibility and has allowed some drivers to use the residential car parks if the van can fit within a standard car lot, and does not obstruct or endanger other car park users. They will be charged the heavy vehicle season parking rate.
For passenger vans that are unable to fit within a standard car lot, or are unable to park within multi-storey car parks due to height or weight limits, their drivers will have to park them in heavy vehicle parking lots. There is a range of heavy vehicle season parking rates depending on the location of the parks. For similar type of locations, the rates levied by HDB and URA are largely similar.
asked the Minister for Defence (a) if he will provide an update on the progress that has been made in the relocation of Paya Lebar Airbase; and (b) when is the relocation expected to be completed.
: Paya Lebar Airbase’s (PLAB’s) relocation will be a long term and complex undertaking that will be realised at about 2030 and beyond as Changi Airbase East (CAB) and Tengah Airbase (TAB) will have to be expanded to accommodate various assets and facilities to replace PLAB. This ensures that the RSAF’s operational readiness to defend our skies is not compromised.
Over the past year, MINDEF has been working closely with MND and other relevant agencies on the planning and implementation details associated with the relocation. The current focus is on expanding Changi Airbase East and building a new runway at Changi, a complex undertaking that requires highly skilled engineering as well as close coordination with the ongoing runway and terminal expansion works at Singapore Changi Airport. Construction of facilities at Changi will commence after detailed site surveys and land preparation works are completed. For Tengah Airbase, the current effort is on the detailed airbase facility design.
To ensure the RSAF’s operational readiness is maintained, the RSAF has put in place plans to build up various capabilities which include a state-of-the-art Island Air Defence System, fighters and other key mission capabilities. The ASTER-30 Surface-to-Air Missile System and the recently announced aerostat system are part of this effort. The RSAF will also be upgrading and renewing some of our older systems to meet our long-term security needs.
MINDEF will continue to work closely with MND and the relevant agencies on the detailed planning and implementation of the relocation. At the same time, we will ensure that the RSAF maintains its deterrent edge and continues to be an effective and formidable force to safeguard Singapore’s peace and security.
asked the Minister for Defence (a) if he can give an update on the progress made by the multinational coalition forces in their fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria; and (b) what is the morale of SAF troops that have been deployed in the surrounding region in support of the coalition forces.
: In response to a separate but similar Parliamentary Question on 19 January 2015, [Please refer to Question No 5 in the Oral Answers to Questions section on 19 January 2015.] the Minister for Defence has provided an update on Singapore’s deployment to the multinational coalition forces in the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS). Please refer to that reply.
asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs with a new President and appointed leadership in Indonesia, whether there will be changes in the bilateral relations between Singapore and Indonesia as well as multilaterally in ASEAN.
: Singapore’s relations with Indonesia have always been broad-based and multi-faceted. This is underpinned by mutual respect and "win-win" cooperation in various fields, such as the economy, education, environment, health and defence. Our ties at the leadership level are excellent and are buttressed by strong people-to-people links. We have also stood together in solidarity during times of crises. For instance, we just commemorated the tenth anniversary of the tsunami that devastated Aceh on 26 December 2004. The Singapore Armed Forces worked closely with the Indonesian military to help the victims and their families in the aftermath of the disaster. During the recent crash of AirAsia flight QZ 8501, Singapore supported the search and locate and subsequent recovery efforts led by Indonesia. Our agencies operated closely with their Indonesian counterparts, leveraging on the close ties forged over many years. Similarly, we have cooperated closely in international and regional forums. Singapore and Indonesia share similar views on the need for a stable region with an open and inclusive regional architecture. We have worked well together to promote ASEAN centrality, stability and prosperity. When there are outstanding or difficult issues, we have been able to discuss them in a frank and constructive manner in order to find a way forward. Ultimately, we understand that as neighbours and regional partners, there is much to be gained in strengthening the relationship between our two countries. I am confident that this will continue to be the case going forward.
Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong visited Jakarta to attend Indonesian President Joko Widodo’s inauguration on 20 October 2014 and hosted a breakfast for the latter in Singapore on 22 November 2014. In their discussions, PM Lee and President Joko committed to maintain the strong cooperation between our countries. PM Lee expressed Singapore’s willingness to work closely with President Joko’s Administration in areas where there are complementarities. I also met my foreign affairs counterpart Ms Retno Marsudi on a number of occasions recently. She visited Singapore for her introductory visit on 26 November 2014 and I visited Jakarta in December 2014 to have discussions with her and other Indonesian leaders. Similarly, many of our Ministers and officials have good ties with their counterparts in President Joko’s Administration and are committed to advancing the relationship.
Indonesia is a key player internationally and regionally, especially within ASEAN. Indonesia’s support will be crucial for the success of the ASEAN Community in 2015 and beyond. As the region’s largest economy, Indonesia’s continued stability and development are vital to us all. I am confident that Indonesia will continue to play a constructive role in the region. We look forward to maintaining our close cooperation with Indonesia in ASEAN and other forums.
asked the Minister for Health whether there are any plans to include perfusionists, podiatrists, respiratory therapists and physician assistants in the Healthcare Professional Conversion Programme.
: Today, we have Professional Conversion Programmes (PCP) for mid-career professionals who are keen to join healthcare as nurses, physiotherapists, occupational therapists or diagnostic radiographers. Under the Healthcare PCPs, trainees receive funding that covers the full fees of a local training programme, a monthly training allowance, and a Career Transition Bonus upon graduation.
Our Healthcare PCPs focus on disciplines where we have the most significant manpower needs and where there is adequate faculty to support a local training programme. There are currently no plans to extend the PCPs to podiatrists, respiratory therapists, perfusionists or physician assistants.
Instead, the Ministry of Health offers scholarships for Singaporeans to be trained as podiatrists and respirational therapists overseas. Over the past five years, we have awarded 20 scholarships for podiatry and 12 scholarships for respiratory therapy. Our public healthcare institutions also provide in-house training for biological sciences graduates to become perfusionists. We presently do not have physician assistants in the healthcare sector but are reviewing the various healthcare provider roles as we plan for the future.
We will continue to review our Healthcare PCPs as part of our strategy to grow and develop healthcare manpower.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) what is the cost of providing free MRT and bus rides to all Singaporeans above 60 years old, 65 years old, and 67 years old respectively; and (b) whether the Ministry will consider providing free transport to all Singaporeans above 67 years old.
: It is difficult to estimate the costs as the travel patterns of the senior citizen group can vary considerably with different policies in place, and because we only have the data of those who hold the senior citizen concession card, and not that of the entire senior citizen population.
That said, to give an idea of the costs for which the Member has requested, the annual cost of travel incurred by the 580,000 senior citizen card holders, all of whom are Singaporeans 60 years old and above, is about $200 million annually. If we look only at the card holders who are 65 years old and above, and 67 years old and above, the cost is about $125 million and $95 million respectively. With free travel, the travel patterns may change and the estimates may rise due to induced travel demand. Furthermore, the population of all Singaporeans 60 years old and above is about 660,000 today and rising, more than the 580,000 senior citizen card holders, and therefore the estimates are on the low side.
Another consideration would be that all senior citizens who are 60 years old and above already enjoy today, generous discounts of 25% to 59% off adult fares, depending on the distance they travel. Senior citizens who travel frequently can also cap their public transport expenditure by using the monthly concession pass priced at $60.
Given these generous discounts, and the significant additional cost taxpayers and other commuters will have to foot, I am not sure we need or should move to completely free travel for our senior citizens at this time. We will, however, revisit this issue from time to time, and we will continue to pay very close attention to fare affordability for vulnerable groups of Singaporeans, including senior citizens.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) for each year from 2012 to 2014, what is the number of public feedback received on the language abilities of bus captains, in particular their ability to converse in English; and (b) for a legitimate feedback, what are the steps taken to rectify the problem.
: Over the past three years, the Land Transport Authority (LTA) has received around 200 pieces of feedback relating to the language abilities of bus captains, most of which were on their ability to converse in English.
Currently, all bus captains are required to demonstrate basic competency in conversational English before being deployed. Upon receiving a legitimate piece of feedback, LTA will inform the Public Transport Operators, who will send the bus captain for a refresher course. The bus captain will be redeployed only after passing a language test.
asked the Minister for Manpower whether the Ministry will consider increasing the current minimum annual leave entitlement of seven days under the Employment Act.
: The Employment Act (EA) stipulates minimum labour standards to be complied by all employers and so ought to be kept basic. Under the EA, an employee who has served an employer for at least three months is entitled to seven days of paid annual leave in the first year of service. Subsequently, for every year of service with the same employer, he is entitled to an additional one day’s paid annual leave, up to 14 days. However, employers are encouraged to consider more generous leave benefits as a strategy to attract good workers in this tight labour market.
A 2014 survey by the Ministry of Manpower showed that many companies already provide more days of annual leave than what is legislated. About half of the establishments
2
provided more than the minimum of seven days of annual leave for their rank-and-file employees, and 35% already provide 14 days or more.
Employees, who see that their organisations are more generous than just following the minimal provisions of the law to protect the most vulnerable, are likely to be more committed. A more motivated workforce can, in turn, benefit employers in terms of lower absenteeism, higher staff retention as well as better productivity.
asked the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth whether the former Surrender Chamber in the old City Hall building will be restored to its former state when the renovations are completed and the National Gallery Singapore opens next year.
: The City Hall Chamber, commonly known to be the "Surrender Chamber", is being restored and will retain its original features when the National Gallery opens next year.
Key elements such as the timber flooring, chandeliers, wooden wall panelling and mezzanine viewing gallery have been well-preserved. Subtle spot-lighting has been the only notable addition to the space.
The Chamber is where the occupying Japanese forces surrendered on 12 September 1945. It also bore witness to two significant events in the history of modern Singapore – the swearing-in of Singapore’s first Prime Minister and Cabinet on 5 June 1959, and the inauguration of Singapore’s first Yang-di Pertuan Negara on 4 December 1959. The National Gallery Singapore will feature these and other significant historical events related to the building through information panels, guided tours and multimedia guides.
