: On behalf of the House, I wish to express our condolences to the families of the victims of the Christchurch attack that occurred on 15 March 2019. We stand united with our New Zealand friends in this tragedy. I invite Members of this House to observe a moment of silence in memory of the victims and to express our condolences from this House. Members, please rise.
–
1 To ask
the Minister for Health in light of the recent case of a $50,000 fine by the Singapore Medical Council for a doctor who was tricked into conveying medical information to a patient's brother (a) what are the parameters for communication between doctors and family members, especially when a patient may not be in the position to provide consent or has given implied but not express consent; and (b) what provisions are there in a perceived urgency or emergency, or if doctors have been deliberately misled into giving the information, despite the information being given in good faith and with due concern for the patient.
2
asked the Minister for Health in respect of the Singapore Medical Council (SMC)'s action against a doctor for breaching patient confidentiality (a) whether the Ministry will review the mitigating factors in the case; (b) how will this SMC ruling impact on any urgent need for doctors to transmit information over the telephone to their patients or their care-givers; and (c) whether the Ministry will be drawing clearer guidelines for the medical profession to comply with.
: Question No 1.
: Mr Speaker, as I would be making a Ministerial Statement later on this subject, may I have your permission to take both Question Nos 1 and 2 during my Ministerial Statement?
: Yes, please. Er Dr Lee Bee Wah.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources (a) whether Singapore has received any updates on the Johor government's efforts to manage their hotspots and, if so, what are these; (b) how can the health and well-being of Singapore's residents be safe-guarded against the long-term exposure to haze pollutants; and (c) whether there are plans to conduct outreach programmes to allay concerns and provide regular updates on the haze situation arising from hotspots in Johor.
4
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources (a) what specific sensors are there in place in Punggol to measure the level of volatile organic compounds in the air; and (b) whether there has been an increase in the measured levels since the chemical waste dumping incident in Pasir Gudang.
: Sir, with your permission, may I take Question Nos 3 and 4 together?
: Yes, please.
: Thank you. Members of this House would be aware of the environmental pollution incidents in Johor over the last two months.
In February, NEA detected hotspots of fires with smoke plumes in Southern Johor through satellite remote sensing. The Department of Environment (DOE) Johor, subsequently alerted NEA to fires at two landfills in Bandar Tenggara and Tanjong Langsat, as well as a fire at Punggai in the area of an oil palm plantation. The resultant smoke plumes, blown by the prevailing northeasterly winds, affected both Johoreans and Singaporeans with intermittent burning smells over the past few weeks. While most of the fires have been put out,
NEA continued to detect hotspots in Southern Johor.
NEA monitors the ambient air quality in Singapore through a network of real-time ambient air monitoring sensors across Singapore. These sensors continuously measure the key air pollutants, namely, sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, ozone, particulate matter – both PM2.5 and PM10. The concentrations of these air pollutants are used to compute the Pollutant Standards Index (PSI) over a rolling 24-hour period.
Since June 2016, NEA has introduced bands and descriptors for the one-hour PM2.5 concentrations, as a guide to help the public better assess the current air quality. The 24-hour PSI and the one-hour PM2.5 readings in the five regions of Singapore and corresponding health advisory are available to the public on the NEA website and myEnv mobile application. Members of the public can use the information as a guide to plan their activities. Between early-February and mid-March when the hotspots were detected in Johor, the 24-hour PSI readings remained within the Good to Moderate range, and the one-hour PM2.5 levels remained in the Normal range.
According to media reports, since 7 March 2019, more than 3,000 Johoreans fell ill as a result of the illegal dumping of around 20 to 40 tonnes of chemical waste into Sungai Kim Kim, a river in Pasir Gudang. Hazardous fumes caused severe symptoms including nausea, shortness of breath and vomiting. Thousands needed immediate medical attention and many were admitted to hospitals for treatment. Some were in critical condition and had to be placed under intensive care. Young and vulnerable children were among the worst affected. The authorities closed all 111 schools in the Pasir Gudang district on 13 March 2019 for more than two weeks.
Singaporeans watched with deep concern and were saddened by this serious environmental violation, where toxic chemicals were dumped into the river, with little regard for the people who live in the surrounding areas. The chemicals detected in the air samples from Sungai Kim Kim and its vicinity contained chemicals such as benzene which is carcinogenic. The Malaysian media has also reported illegal dumping of chemical waste at other sites in Pasir Gudang.
According to the Malaysian authorities, they have cleaned up a 1.5 km polluted stretch of Sungai Kim Kim in Pasir Gudang. More than 900
tonnes of soil and 1,500 tonnes of polluted water have been removed. The Malaysian authorities have worked expeditiously to contain the problem, in view of the impact to the environment and to public health. I wish all those affected, in particular, the children, a speedy recovery. Singapore stands ready to provide assistance to the Malaysian authorities if needed.
Throughout this period, our agencies have been closely monitoring the situation and putting in place precautionary measures to guard against any potential pollution impacts arising from the illegal dumping of chemical waste. We have not detected any pollution impacts on Singapore’s air and water quality or water supply.
NEA continuously monitors the ambient concentration of a variety of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) at our air monitoring stations, including at four stations located in the north-eastern region of Singapore. These include benzene, toluene and xylene, as well as other common VOCs from industrial emissions which are also closely monitored by other environmental agencies such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
NEA has not detected any elevated levels of VOCs. The 24-hour PSI has also been in the Good to Low-Moderate range, while the one-hour PM2.5 readings remained in the Normal range. The SCDF has also deployed its portable stand-off chemical gas detectors at the northeast region of Singapore to detect toxic chemicals and has not detected any toxic chemicals in the air.
For water quality, NEA’s continuous buoy-based coastal water quality monitoring sensors deployed along the Straits of Johor have not detected any unusual variation in the key physical, chemical, and microbiological water quality parameters. NEA has also taken the additional step of collecting water samples at Pulau Ubin and its vicinity to test additional parameters, including compounds Malaysia has identified due to the chemical waste dumped in Sungai Kim Kim. These compounds have not been detected in our water samples. NEA has also not detected any anomalies in the quality of the waters at our recreational coastal beaches.
PUB’s online sensors have shown that the water quality of Johor River, our waterways and reservoirs in the north and north-eastern part of Singapore, as well as the water supply is within normal variations. On-site inspections and water quality checks have also shown no abnormalities. As a precautionary measure, PUB has installed oil booms at the outlet drains and estuaries along the north and north-eastern coast of Singapore. This incident has no impact on our water supply as the chemical dumping location is outside of our Johor River catchment area, where part of our water supply comes from.
There have been no reports of unusual fish mortality at our local fish farms in the Straits of Johor. Singapore Food Agency (SFA)’s tests of seafood samples from these fish farms for compounds such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), VOCs and heavy metals have not detected any anomalies.
Environment pollution is a cross-border issue that requires collaboration between the authorities of both countries. These include the provision of early warnings, and environmental monitoring data and guidelines. NEA and SCDF have been in contact with their respective Malaysian counterparts – DOE Johor and the Johor Fire and Rescue Department (BOMBA) – to obtain regular updates on the situation there.
We will continue to monitor the situation and provide updates if there are any significant developments. We will also continue to step up our checks and enforcement, to protect our environment and safeguard the health and safety of Singaporeans.
: I would like to thank the Senior Minister of State for her comprehensive answer and NEA for closely monitoring the situation at Johor. Over the last one month, residents in Yishun Town had to suffer not just the burning smell, but on two days at least, there were also pungent smells like sewer pipes bursting. Many residents have been asking me what happened. I had to approach NEA for answers. I would like to ask, is it possible for NEA to be more active or more forthcoming in broadcasting any findings so as to keep residents informed. The second question is that, my residents have also given constant feedback that they saw chimneys burning in Pasir Gudang and they are worried about the long-term effects on their health. Every night, they see these chimneys burning and they are thinking, "Surely, there are gases being given out." I would like ask the Ministry whether there is any long-term effect on the health of residents.
: For the first question on whether we can give more regular updates, first of all, as I have said, on the NEA website as well as on the myENV app, we do provide readings, hourly updates in fact, of PSI and PM2.5. We monitor that for the five regions – north, south, east, west and central. That will also include the northeast area. If there are any significant variations, for instance, above normal levels, unhealthy levels, we would notify the public with this information.
With regards to cross-border environmental pollution, for instance, or smell coming from Johor, we work very closely with our Johor counterparts – Department of Environment (DOE) Johor and also the Johor Fire and Rescue Department (BOMBA). We also have continuous monitoring as well as our remote satellite sensing to identify smoke plumes as well as hotspots. But these obviously, would be for the larger hotspots and smoke plumes that we can detect. And depending on the wind direction, whether they will actually travel down to Singapore. So, for the recent early February to mid March incidents, because of the north-easterly winds, fires normally occurred in the afternoon. That is how we have spotted it. By the time it comes in, in the evening when the wind has weakened or slowed down, as well as the temperatures have cooled, these smells, if there are, would be harder to dilute and disperse because it will be hard to disperse the air pollutants upwards due to the cooler temperature and then the wind does not bring it away. So, by day time in the morning, the sun is up, wind speed has gathered strength, it then gets diluted and dispersed away.
But let me say that, there is no direct correlation or association between the smells – burning smell or chemical smell – and the ambient air quality readings. So, there maybe smells but ambient air quality maybe alright. And in this case, we have found throughout the period that ambient air quality based on PSI and PM2.5 has been in the normal to moderate range and PM2.5 reading is normal. The smells can be due to a variety of reasons, depending on whether it is a plantation burning or landfill burning. The other thing would be for VOCs. By themselves, there could be smell or they could be mixed with other chemicals and different smells are produced. But as I have said, there is generally no correlation between the air quality readings and the smells.
Regarding flaring – I assume that is what the Member is talking about. There are petrochemical industries in Pasir Gudang. And flaring is a common safety feature in refineries and petrochemical plants. What happens is, during routine maintenance, or when there is either a plant shutdown or start-up, you need flaring to prevent the built up of process gases. Actually, flaring will safely burn these process gases off into carbon dioxide and water vapour so that there would not be any health impact due to this flaring.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources (a) what is the impact of the recent challenges facing Hyflux on our water supply; (b) what contingency plans are there in place, in particular whether PUB has the operational capacity to take over the desalinisation plant; (c) what is the extent of private sector involvement in our water provision; and (d) whether any review should be done in light of what has happened to Hyflux.
: Mr Speaker, I thank the Member for his question. I know that many Singaporeans are concerned about what the on-going Hyflux restructuring means for our water supply.
Water is an existential issue for Singapore. PUB's priority has been and will always be to ensure Singapore's water security. Over many decades, we have diversified our water sources and built up our four national taps. NEWater and desalinated water are integral to our water security, as they are weather-resilient and can supply water even during dry spells.
As part of our plan to build up our desalination and NEWater capacities for our water security, the Government has partnered the private sector to design, build, own and operate some of our desalination and NEWater plants. Today, we have five NEWater plants and three desalination plants. Out of these, three of the NEWater plants and two of the desalination plants, including Tuaspring, are based on a Public-Private Partnership, or PPP, model. The remaining three plants, as well as all our other water supply assets, are owned and operated by PUB.
The PPP model has been useful in allowing us to tap on private sector innovations and cost efficiencies to deliver water services more effectively. To ensure that water security is never compromised, PUB has put in safeguards as part of the PPP contracts. Even though PUB does not interfere with the business decisions made by the concession companies, PUB monitors the performance of the plants under the PPP model to ensure that the concession companies can meet their contractual obligations to PUB. Where there are issues, PUB will require the concession companies to rectify them, failing which, PUB may exercise its rights to terminate the PPP contracts and take control of the plants. We do not exercise these termination rights lightly but will not hesitate to do so when it becomes necessary to safeguard our water security.
As PUB continues to operate its own desalination and NEWater plants, PUB has the operational capabilities, experience and manpower to take over and operate the private plants, should the need arise.
Hyflux is currently involved in two PPP projects with PUB: the SingSpring Desalination Plant or SSDP and the Tuaspring Integrated Water and Power Project or TIWPP. SSDP is owned by SingSpring Trust, which is majority owned by Keppel Infrastructure Trust, with Hyflux owning a minority stake. The SSDP is not affected by Hyflux's debt and business reorganisation, nor is it subject to the moratorium that has been imposed by the court.
As for the TIWPP, it is owned by Tuaspring Pte Ltd, or TPL, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Hyflux. Let me briefly recap the events leading up to today. In 2010, PUB called an open tender for a 70 million gallons per day desalination plant, to be completed by 2013. In its tender bid, Hyflux proposed a different business model – one of an integrated desalination and power plant. Hyflux made a business decision to build the power plant that has a capacity significantly more than what the desalination plant needed, with the intention of selling excess power to the national power grid.
Hyflux’s bid met PUB’s requirements for constructing and operating a desalination plant and was the most competitive bid among the submissions. PUB also took into account Hyflux's expertise and track record. Thus, PUB awarded the tender to Hyflux in 2011. As with other such PPP projects, PUB built in safeguards in the Water Purchase Agreement, or WPA, signed with TPL.
Since 2017, TPL has been experiencing difficulties fulfilling its contractual obligations under the WPA. These include a failure to keep the plant reliably operational as required. More recently, it has also failed to produce financial evidence to demonstrate its ability to keep the plant running for the next six months. PUB gave time to TPL to try to sort out its problems but PUB’s concerns have been growing over time. To safeguard our water security, PUB issued TPL with a default notice on 5 March 2019 to require TPL to remedy the defaults within the default notice period. If they failed to do so, PUB will terminate the WPA and take over the desalination plant. This is to ensure that a critical asset remains in safe hands and avoids uncertainty over the operations of the desalination plant. Ultimately, PUB’s actions are based on our over-riding objective of ensuring Singapore's water security and that water continues to be reliably produced at the plant to meet the needs of Singapore and Singaporeans.
The purchase price for the desalination plant will be determined by an independent valuer in accordance with the WPA. Based on current valuation, the purchase price is negative and TPL will hence have to pay PUB a compensation sum. TPL itself has stated that there is a high likelihood for this. The desalination plant has been and will likely continue to lose money for the next few years. In addition, PUB would have to incur costs to make good the plant and ensure that it operates reliably for its remaining lifespan.
However, given TPL's current financial position, PUB is unlikely to recover the compensation sum from TPL. PUB has therefore indicated that it is willing to waive the compensation sum and purchase the desalination plant at zero dollars.
Let me be clear: PUB’s actions do not weaken either TPL or Hyflux, and do not disadvantage those who have invested in Hyflux. Indeed, it is quite favourable to TPL. TPL has in fact noted in its letter to PUB on 20 March 2019 that if PUB terminates the WPA, it would alleviate the pressure on the rest of the Hyflux group. It positively impacts Hyflux's value and hence the value of the Hyflux shares being offered. In its announcement on 26 March 2019, Hyflux further stated that SM Investments Pte Ltd, the prospective investor of Hyflux, had concerns over working capital requirements post-investment and that PUB’s actions should alleviate such concerns.
The current situation with Hyflux does not mean that we should dismiss the PPP model altogether as our other PPP projects are working well. The safeguards that PUB has built into the PPP contracts have worked well to ensure our water security. In fact, TPL provides an example of how these safeguards are robust and have served their purpose. That said, we are always studying ways to strengthen the safeguards and enhance our operations and we will continue to do so.
Let me assure members of the House and all Singaporeans that PUB will always act to ensure Singapore's water security. Water is an existential issue for Singapore. Water security is integral to Singapore’s national security. PUB's recent actions reinforce that. We will never allow Singapore's national or water security to be compromised.
: I thank the Minister for his answers. I have two supplementary questions for him. The first is, the Minister has said that the PPP model still works. Given that these are critical water assets, and having seen what has happened and the assurance from the Minister that the Ministry is looking further into the safeguards that are currently provided, I would like to ask the Minister which are these areas that we think need to be further improved on. The fact of the matter is that it did occur here and this is an area which we know we cannot take chances on.
My second supplementary question, we would all have residents who are also investors in Hyflux. The current actions by PUB and Government, the question that will be asked would be, "Should we bail out Hyflux and in the process help all residents and investors, many of whom are Singaporeans?"
: I thank the Member for the supplementary questions. Firstly, we have to look at many areas but there are two important areas that we always have to focus on. One is the operational ability of the company to make sure that we continue to be able to produce water, almost at will. And that has been compromised in the last few months with the inability by Hyflux or TPL to assure us they can do so. And that is connected with the second one somewhat, which has to do with the financial ability to support it.
So, we will continue to work on these two issues because they are the most important ones. They ensure that we continue to have plants that will continue to operate while under PPP model.
The second question is whether we should bail out our investors. The financial performance of companies, as mentioned by Minister Ong Ye Kung in a previous answer, depends on many factors. It could include global business conditions, competition, performance of specific projects and also its own business decisions. Therefore, investors in search of returns must understand that returns come with some risks.
Before I answer specifically to that question the Member has asked, let me reiterate what I have said in my answer.
First, the current valuation of the purchase price for the Tuas desalination plant is negative; that is clear. In fact, while it is a current valuation and after the formalities are done, we are certain it will continue to be negative.
Second, because of this, TPL has to pay PUB, but PUB recognises its inability to do so and PUB has indicated it will waive the compensation sum. Like I mentioned just now, it is actually a positive impact on TPL.
We can understand the concerns and anxiety of the retail investors and we are saddened by their plight. But the Government cannot use taxpayers' monies to help investors recoup their investment losses. Even if there are any proceeds from the takeover of the Tuas plant, we must remember there is an order of who gets what first. In this case, Maybank will still receive payments from TPL before all other general creditors, including PUB.
: Mr Pritam Singh.
: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Minister, according to a Straits Times report, Hyflux's financial woes was a direct reason explaining why the company was unable to replace poorly performing membranes promptly in early 2017, a state of affairs which affected the quality and quantity of water that was produced by the Tuaspring desalination plant. To that end, I have a few questions for the Minister.
Firstly, as the quality of water was affected, did this compromise public safety at any point in time?
Secondly, which entity eventually paid for the membrane replacement and was any compensation paid or owing to PUB as a result of Hyflux's failure to ensure the quality and quantity of water produced by the Tuaspring desalination plant in early 2017?
My final question is: how often has this situation developed in the Tuaspring plant? Was it just in early 2017 or was it an on-going occurrence?
: PUB conducts many, many tests on our water system to ensure water safety, including TSDP. Therefore, we are certain that water supplied to our consumers is safe to drink and for use. Even during the times when we had concerns about their operations, they were able to address these concerns. But more recently, because of the financial situation, it begs us to question whether that is sustainable. Therefore, we have put in the default notice to them to say that we are concerned: one, that operationally they are not able to address the issues to assure us they can continue to produce water; and secondly, that they are financially distressed and that they have not proven that they can sustain the plant for the next six months.
There was another question.
: How many times has this happened in the past? Did it just occur in early 2017 or was it on-going?
: No, this was very recent since 2017.
: I would like to ask how does the Minister justify using taxpayers' monies to take over negative-valued asset from Hyflux?
: Well, we have two options. One is to assert our rights, stress Hyflux even further by asserting that right, and after the whole process we may not get anything at the end of the process. Therefore, we have made the decision that because we are not likely to get anything from claiming the compensation, we have decided to not claim for the compensation.
: Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister: in hindsight, could more actions have been taken earlier on before it got to this stage? We do have a lot of other big projects that are under the PPP model and we do have critical assets such as power plants that are operated privately. In that sense, how do you monitor all these assets and make sure that they are financially okay? I was just wondering whether something could have been done in hindsight for this Hyflux case, rather than to wait until this stage?
: Well, as with any DBOO plants, PUB monitors the desalination plant – in this case TSDP – to ensure that it is operating reliably and executing its contractual obligations to PUB.
And then when troubles emerge, the responsible and fair thing to do is for PUB to require TPL to rectify it, and not to immediately issue a default notice. In fact, to give them time to do so. When these things happen – it is not just in the case of TSDP, it happens in other plants too – there is a need to give them time to rectify. If they can rectify them well and to the satisfaction of PUB, then the contract has not been violated.
PUB has been in talks with TPL regarding its defaults all this while and has given TPL as much time as possible. Our duty is to ensure water security and take all the necessary steps within its contractual rights, primarily to protect Singapore's water security. So, I think we have done that.
asked the Minister for Health in respect of the incident whereby blood donors' personal data are compromised (a) whether there are further updates from the preliminary investigation; (b) what follow-up actions have been carried out with the cybersecurity expert who discovered the vulnerability; (c) whether there is a framework in place to ensure that vendors comply with safeguards to prevent unsafe practices and unauthorised access to data; and (d) what measures are necessary to prevent future occurrences and to reassure future blood donors.
7
asked the Minister for Health in light of the exposure of blood donors' personal data online (a) whether the Ministry will consider streamlining the procurement of IT services across its departments, statutory boards, hospitals and clinics to reduce personal data access by multiple vendors; and (b) whether there are factors causing the public healthcare sector to be particularly vulnerable to IT incidents.
8
asked the Minister for Health in light of the cyber breach involving 800,000 blood donors (a) how will the Ministry improve its overall cybersecurity measures; and (b) how will its security framework also extend to its providers and vendors.
9
asked the Minister for Health in respect of the data leak of more than 800,000 blood donors' personal information from the database of the Health Sciences Authority (a) why was the data placed on a server accessible through the Internet on 4 January 2019; (b) how did the unnamed cybersecurity consultant gain access to the data; (c) why did he keep the data; and (d) whether his conduct was in breach of any law.
10
asked the Minister for Health regarding the data leak of more than 800,000 blood donors' personal information (a) whether the Health Sciences Authority is aware of any unauthorised access to the database during the nine-week period of exposure on the Internet; and (b) whether such incidents are being investigated.
11
asked the Minister for Health (a) whether there has been any compensation or payment made to the cybersecurity expert who discovered and downloaded the unsecured HSA database containing the personal information of more than 800,000 blood donors; and (b) whether it is a condition set by the said expert that his identity should remain secret.
12
asked the Minister for Health in respect of the incident whereby personal information of more than 800,000 blood donors were improperly put online by the IT vendor of the Health Sciences Authority (a) what are the possible effects of such disclosure to the blood donors affected and what measures can be put in place to minimise these effects; (b) what structures will be put in place to ensure that such an incident can be avoided in the future; and (c) what penalties will be imposed to address any improper action by relevant parties that led to the improper disclosure.
: Mr Speaker, with leave, may I take Question Nos 6 to 12 together?
: Yes, please.
: Thank you. Members of this House have asked for further updates on the preliminary investigation of the data leak of blood donors' personal information from the database of the vendor appointed by the Health Sciences Authority or HSA.
Secur Solutions Group Ptd Ltd or Secur Solutions is an independent vendor of HSA appointed to maintain and enhance the queue management system for blood donors.
On 13 March 2019, a foreign cybersecurity expert had informed the Personal Data Protection Commission (PDPC) that the registration-related information of blood donors could be accessed because of a vulnerability in the server used and managed by Secur Solutions. HSA immediately worked with Secur Solutions to disable access to the server.
On 30 March, Secur Solutions issued a statement to provide more information on this incident. Investigations are continuing and a further update will be provided when available.
Members have also asked questions relating to the cybersecurity expert. The cybersecurity expert works for a company that specialises in identifying and reporting vulnerabilities of IT systems. He was not employed or engaged by HSA or MOH. He informed HSA on 16 March 2019 that he had deleted his copy of the data and has no intention of disclosing its contents. He had never made any request for compensation or payment, and we will not be taking any legal action against him because he had reported the vulnerability to us straightaway, and had no intention to keep, use or otherwise expose the contents of the database, and has not done so.
Members have asked what additional steps MOH and HSA can take to reduce the risk of data mismanagement.
The measures to be taken to prevent a similar occurrence will be shaped by what specific findings arise from the on-going investigations into the incident. MOH and its agencies will also conduct a review on the life-cycle management of the data being handled by existing IT vendors.
In addition, the HSA Board has set up a Board Committee chaired by Mr Max Loh, Chairman of HSA Board's Audit and Risk Committee. The Board Committee also includes members from the Government Technology Organisation or GovTech. It will review HSA's current policies and processes for managing sensitive data, and recommend measures.
Yesterday, the Government also announced that the Prime Minister has also convened a Public Sector Data Security Review Committee, chaired by Deputy Prime Minister Teo Chee Hean, to conduct a comprehensive review of data security practices across the entire Public Service. MOH and its agencies will extend our fullest cooperation to the work of the Committee.
Dr Chia Shi-Lu has asked if the Ministry should consider streamlining the procurement of IT services across its departments, statutory boards and public hospitals to reduce personal data access by multiple vendors. We agree, and have done so progressively in the public healthcare family, where we are able to do so.
: Minister Iswaran, I believe you had asked to take the supplementary questions after responses to the next two Parliamentary Questions (PQs)?
: Yes.
: I can take the supplementary questions now if Members —
: I believe the request is to take it altogether later. Ms Sylvia Lim.
: Question No 13.
asked the Minister for Communications and Information regarding the recent data leak of more than 800,000 blood donors' personal information from the database of HSA (a) what is the role of the Personal Data Protection Commission in investigating this incident; and (b) whether any review is being done to ascertain whether HSA has acted reasonably in protecting the personal data including whether the contractual obligations between HSA and its IT vendor reasonably safeguarded the personal information entrusted to these parties.
14
asked the Minister for Communications and Information in view of data breaches across public IT systems (a) whether it is justifiable for public agencies to be exempted from Personal Data Protection Act; (b) what recourse do citizens have, other than to complain to agencies or seek civil action; and (c) whether there should be a tangible penalty meted out to these public agencies for public accountability.
: Mr Speaker, may I have your permission to take Question Nos 13 and 14 together, please?
: Yes, please.
: Mr Speaker, with regard to the incident involving HSA, the Personal Data Protection Commission (PDPC) is investigating Secur Solutions Group Pte Ltd, which is a private company and vendor of IT services to HSA. If found to be in breach of the Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA), PDPC will take the appropriate enforcement actions against the company, such as issuing directions and imposing financial penalties.
The Senior Minister of State for Health has earlier outlined the review of HSA’s data security policies and practices that is being undertaken. As HSA is a Government agency, the Smart Nation and Digital Government Group is also conducting an investigation into the incident.
Ms Quay has asked if it is justifiable that public agencies are exempted from the PDPA. Implicit in the Member’s question is the presumption that public sector agencies are not accountable for their data protection practices or not held to a high standard because the PDPA does not apply to them. That is wrong and simply not the case. Public sector agencies are subject to a different piece of legislation and other regulations. In particular, public sector agencies have to comply with the Government Instruction Manuals and the Public Sector (Governance) Act (PSGA). Collectively, they have comparable if not higher standards of data protection compared to the PDPA, and similar investigations and enforcement actions are taken against data security breaches.
I have previously explained in Parliament why we have adopted this approach. To reiterate, the PDPA does not apply to public agencies because there are fundamental differences in how the public sector operates, which requires a different approach to personal data protection when compared to the private sector. In order to enable a whole-of-Government approach to the delivery of public services, personal data has to be managed as a common resource within the public sector. The considerations are different in the private sector, as there is no such expectation of a holistic approach to the delivery of commercial services across private organisations.
Citizens have the same recourse for a data breach in the public sector as with the PDPA. Where citizens suspect that their data has been mishandled by a private sector organisation, they can lodge a complaint with PDPC; or with GovTech, if a public sector agency is involved. In practice, there are no wrong doors and the complaint will be directed to the relevant agencies for follow-up. Affected individuals can also seek mediation or take civil action against the organisation or agency which mishandled the data.
The Member has asked whether tangible penalties should be imposed on public agencies for public accountability. Public officers who flout the Government’s data security rules, and are found to have misused or disclosed data in an unauthorised manner, could be held criminally liable under the PSGA. The penalties include fines of up to $5,000 or a jail term of up to two years, or both. It is not meaningful to impose financial penalties on public sector agencies because the cost of such penalties would ultimately have to be borne by the same public purse.
Mr Speaker, over the years, the Government has progressively enhanced security measures to safeguard sensitive data. The Government has also increased the number and types of internal IT audits, to check on agencies’ data access and data protection measures. Nevertheless, recent data-related incidents have underscored the urgency to strengthen data security policies and practices in the public sector.
Therefore, the Prime Minister has convened a Public Sector Data Security Review Committee to conduct a comprehensive review of data security practices across the entire Public Service. This includes measures and processes related to the collection and protection of citizens’ personal data by public sector agencies, as well as vendors who handle personal data on behalf of the Government. While individual agencies are investigating and taking action on the specific incidents, this Committee will undertake a comprehensive review across the public sector, and incorporate industry and global best practices to strengthen data security.
This review will help to ensure that all public sector agencies maintain the highest standards of data governance. This is essential to uphold public confidence and deliver a high quality of public service to our citizens through the use of data. The work of this Committee will complement our efforts to achieve our Smart Nation vision. The Public Sector Data Security Review Committee will submit its findings and recommendations to the Prime Minister by 30 November 2019.
: We will take the supplementary questions for the earlier Parliamentary Questions as well as for these two. Miss Cheng Li Hui
: I have two supplementary questions. It was reported that the server was also accessed by several other IP addresses. What do we know about this access? Is it by foreigners or locals and will we be pursuing any actions on them? Do they have the information on the blood donors as well? For those who failed to donate their blood due to illnesses, can this sensitive information be accessed?
: On Miss Cheng's latter question, that information was not on the server that was compromised. Only registration related information was on that server. And if I can just cite for Miss Cheng this relevant portion from the vendor's statement. It says that the information that was on that server were NRIC, gender, number of blood donations, dates of the last three blood donations and in some cases, blood type, height and weight.
As for the first point, the unauthorised access is from various locations. That is still being looked into and when we have a fuller position on this and have more clarity, we will provide those answers.
: Mr Speaker, I have three supplementary questions for Minister Iswaran. The first is, I am glad to hear that he confirmed that the private sector vendor Secured Solutions Group is actually governed by the PDPA and that PDPC is looking into their conduct. My first question will be, is the PDPC going to wait for the outcome of the HSA investigation and then, follow on from there or is it concurrent?
The second question is, it was mentioned that the Prime Minister has now convened a cross-Government committee chaired by Deputy Prime Minister Teo to look into standards of Government IT security. Does this confirm that the Government is actually not satisfied and that the standards so far have been wanting in the public sector?
Finally, the third question, which is an interesting one, is Minister's answer to Nominated Member Quay's question about financial penalties on organisations. He mentioned that it was not meaningful to fine public agencies because the fine would in the end come from the public purse. But can the central Government not operate on the premise that no additional money is going to be provided to public agencies to pay fines, and therefore, the agencies would just have to cope with cuts somewhere else to pay these fines, whether it is from bonuses of Senior Management or whatever it is? Because there is still an important signalling effect that the Government is prepared, as an organisation, to abide by the same standards it expects of small businesses.
: Mr Speaker, I thank the Member for her questions. Firstly, on whether the PDPC's investigations would be concurrent, the answer is yes. But clearly, we would have to be informed by what is happening also in some of the other activities because they have some inter-related factors. But the answer is, the investigations will proceed concurrently.
The second question is, what does the establishment of the Public Sector Data Security Review Committee mean. I think the Member is trying to score a political point here and I want to make it categorically clear. The Government has been working, that is why I said so in my answer, consistently working and improving data security standards. There is a list of things that we have been doing over the years and I think this has been explained in the House many times in response to the Member's questions and that of many other Members as well.
The key point here is that, because there has been a series of these incidents in recent times, the Prime Minister and the Government have assessed that we need to take a holistic look again. That does not mean, that what we have is inadequate or lacking, but what it does mean is we should ensure that we put total effort to ensure that we leave no stones unturned in ensuring the highest standards of are met in the public sector when it comes to data security. If there is something that is to be learnt, whether it is from best practices in the private sector or from global companies, that is something we will be very happy to learn from and incorporate in the Government's practices.
Finally, on the point on financial penalties, and the Member makes the point about signalling effect. I would say, that first of all, in fact I think the term "ownself check ownself" was coined by a Member of her party. So, if you fine yourself, you do ask the question, what is the signalling effect there. It is far important that the signalling effect is that, you are taking this issue seriously and holding relevant people accountable. So, that is why, in the way we go about this, the penalties are focused on the individuals, officers, who have made decisions or taken actions which were deemed to be not compliant, and therefore, there are the consequences that I spelled out.
Having said that, I think, when you take action against an organisation in the public sector, the reputational impact on that organisation and leadership is significant. I think the Member will concede that, that in itself is also a major signalling point, because no organisation, public or private, wants to have its reputation tarnished. Having said that, we are prepared to look at all means, to ensure there is clear accountability and ensure that in the public sector we have the highest standards of data security. That is why, this committee has been set up and we will be open to suggestions. If the Member has interesting ideas on this, we would be happy to hear from her.
: The Minister reassured the House that we have the various acts to impose a high standards of responsibility on public agencies. However, upon reviewing that, there seems to be a lack of clarity in this Act regarding accountability for data breaches. The focus seems to be on misuse of data. Can Minister clarify?
My second supplementary question is, Minister informed the House that the public agencies have regular mandatory internal audits in place to ensure public agencies comply with these standards for data protection and security of ICT systems. In that case, why are these potential lapses not surfaced during previous internal audit checks?
: May I just seek a clarification from the Member, Speaker?
: Yes, please.
: When you say the Act does not refer to data breeches, only data misuse, are you referring to the Public Sector (Governance) Act or are you referring to PDPA?
: I am referring to the Public Sector (Governance) Act, Official Secrets Act, Income Tax Act and Infectious Diseases Acts.
: Yes, and have you also looked at the Instructions Manual (IM) 8? Because I think when you look at them holistically, it will be clear, that the issues with data, whether it is a breach or misuse, and when can I argue that there is a kind of continuum here. But let me assure you, when you have a breach of data, you have to establish why it occurred. If it is because of misuse, there will be a certain set of actions. If it is because your systems were not in place, it has to result in a different set of actions to correct the systemic errors. If there were certain people accountable for that systemic error, then they have to be held to account as well. So, I think there is a flow in the way this will proceed, in terms of action against Government organisations.
The second point on regular IT audits, why did they not throw up such issues in the past. I think that is an age-old question. You can have audits, I think it is not just in IT, you have it in financial audits, you have got quality audits, but you still have incidents. This is because it is human beings running the system and from time to time, it can happen. I think what is important is that when they occur, we learn from these incidents and set them right, and be transparent about what we are doing and how we are going about it.
: Mr Dennis Tan.
: A question for Senior Minister of State Edwin Tong. Is the Senior Minister of State able to answer any aspect of my questions?
: Can the Member elaborate on what other aspects have not been answered?
: No, on my question. Not sure my question has been answered.
: Mr Dennis Tan's question relate to the circumstances in which the information is placed on the server. How it is that there was access that was gained to the data and whether there was a breach of any law? Those are all matters that are covered by the investigations that are currently on-going, and to the extent possible, when this has been ascertained, we will provide those information.
asked Minister for Manpower (a) how can retrenched professionals, managers, executives and technicians (PMETs) who are Singaporeans be better helped to find jobs when 76% of retrenched workers in 2018 are PMETs even though the PMET share of job vacancies has risen to 53% in the same year; and (b) whether the Ministry foresees a worsening structural unemployment in 2019.
16
asked the Minister for Manpower (a) whether the Ministry has investigated the reasons for PMETs making up 75.8% of retrenchments in 2018; (b) which sectors have been most affected by the PMET retrenchments; and (c) how many of these PMETs have received retrenchment benefits and what has been the average compensation received.
: Mr Speaker, may I have your permission to take Question Nos 15 and 16 together?
: Yes, please.
: In 2018, about 5,400 local PMETs were retrenched, the lowest level since 2014. This took place against a backdrop of local PMET employment growth of about 34,000. The resident long-term unemployment rate for PMETs, an indicator of structural unemployment, remained low at 0.8%. At present, there are also about 31,500 vacancies for PMETs. Maybe I should add also that the 31,500 is a higher level than in the past few years.
To ensure retrenched workers receive timely employment support, companies are required to notify the Taskforce for Responsible Retrenchment and Employment Facilitation led by Workforce Singapore (WSG) of the retrenchments. Based on the 2017 survey on retrenchment benefits, around 90% of retrenching establishments paid retrenchment benefits to their workers, slightly higher than in 2016. Among them, more than 70% paid retrenchment benefits of at least two weeks of salary per year of service, as recommended in the Tripartite Advisory on Managing Excess Manpower and Responsible Retrenchment. This was up from around 60% in 2016.
Nearly two-thirds of PMET retrenchments in 2018 were in sectors undergoing restructuring, namely, Wholesale Trade, Financial & Insurance Services, Information & Communications and Professional Services sectors. About seven in 10 of retrenched workers who accepted assistance by the Taskforce found new jobs within six months.
To help PMETs access job opportunities, the Adapt and Grow (A&G) initiative has a range of programmes that address gaps in skills or wage expectations. About 17,000 PMETs were placed last year, nearly double that in 2016. PMET placements made up 56% of all A&G placements, similar to the share of PMETs in the workforce. About 5,000 of them participated in Professional Conversion Programmes.
Nonetheless, there are PMET segments we are monitoring closely, such as mature PMET jobseekers as well as those who are long-term unemployed. Such groups receive more training or wage support under the A&G programmes. As announced at the Budget this year, we will extend the Career Support Programme for two years, to continue providing salary support to employers who hire long-term unemployed or retrenched mature PMETs. WSG is also increasing capacity for Professional Conversion Programmes to help reskill jobseekers for new jobs and working upstream with economic agencies and companies to retrain workers at-risk of retrenchment to take up new jobs within the company.
: I thank the Minister for the comprehensive reply. I have a few supplementary questions.
Could the Minister elaborate which age group among the PMETs who have been retrenched for the past few years are the most affected? At the same time, which age group has benefited most with the growth of these PMET vacancies last year? And do we know the utilisation rate of SkillsFuture Credit among those retrenched, especially among the PMETs, and whether there are any plans for MOM to top up the SkillsFuture Credit?
: Mr Speaker, I respectfully request the Member to file a Parliamentary Question (PQ) for them. I do not have the data on hand. But I have qualitatively explained that the sectors involved are those that are undergoing restructuring to the largest extent.
: Members are reminded that for supplementary questions, please try to keep to the context of the original PQ. Mr Gan Thiam Poh.
: Mr Speaker, I have one question*. I just want to know for those employees from this group who are retrenched, how many of them are from multinational companies (MNCs) or foreign-invested companies?
[(proc text) [*
Question subsequently withdrawn – Mr Gan Thiam Poh: to ask the Minister for Manpower (a) which are the industries that retrenched professionals, managers, executives and technicians (PMETs) in 2018; ( b) how many of the PMETs are from MNCs; (c) what are the reasons for the retrenchments; and (d) how many of them have been helped to secure jobs or arranged for retraining under the Adapt and Grow programme.
] (proc text)]
: Mr Speaker, we do not track the retrenchment numbers according to whether the employer was an MNC or a local company. But I understand where the Member's question is coming from. We do have a sense as to the size of the company. So, if we use the size of the company as a proxy and, say, for example, those that employ 200 and above employees, take them as a proxy for the MNCs, although that is not quite the case. The employers with 200 and above employees, typically, in a year, would be responsible for maybe about 66% or two-thirds of all PMET employment. But for this group, their share of the retrenched PMETs is less, at about 56%.
asked the Minister for Transport with regard to the suspension of all Boeing 737 Max aircraft flying in and out of Singapore (a) whether he can provide an update on the suspension of all Boeing 737 Max flights from Changi Airport; (b) how long is it expected to last; (c) what is the number of Boeing 737 Max aircraft serving the Singapore route and affected by the suspension; (d) what is the estimated number of travellers affected; and (e) what measures are in place to minimise the impact to travellers.
18
asked the Minister for Transport (a) whether the aircraft procurement plans of our local airlines are in any way affected by the accidents involving the Boeing 737 Max aircraft; (b) what is the status of our communication with the US Federal Aviation Administration and Boeing regarding the safety aspects of the aircraft; and (c) whether it is necessary to review the safety risks of other Boeing planes since Boeing 737 Max is reported to be one of the industry's most reliable passenger aircraft.
: Mr Speaker, we are shocked and deeply saddened by the crash of Ethiopian Airlines flight ET302 —
: Are you taking the two Parliamentary Questions together?
: Yes, Mr Speaker, could I take Question Nos 17 and 18 together, please?
: Yes, please.
: Mr Speaker, we are shocked and deeply saddened by the crash of Ethiopian Airlines flight ET302 on 10 March 2019 and also the earlier crash of Lion Air flight JT610 on 29 October 2018. Both disasters involved brand new Boeing 737 Max aircraft during the first 15 minutes of their take-off. Our condolences and thoughts go out to the families of the victims.
In aviation, ensuring the safety of passengers and crew is paramount. This is why the Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore (CAAS) suspended operations of all variants of the Boeing 737 Max aircraft into and out of Singapore on 12 March 2019. CAAS will only lift the suspension when it is fully satisfied that all safety concerns relating to the aircraft type have been adequately addressed. During the suspension, CAAS will not allow airlines to register new Boeing 737 Max aircraft. There is currently no evidence of safety issues with other Boeing aircraft.
CAAS has been communicating closely with Boeing and the US Federal Aviation Authority (FAA), as well as other regulators, including the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), on the safety issues of the Boeing 737 Max aircraft. Even as investigations into what caused the crash are ongoing, Boeing has decided to introduce a design change to the aircraft's Manoeuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS) as soon as it gets the go-ahead from the FAA and other leading aviation regulators. CAAS is closely monitoring this and will ensure that SilkAir incorporates the fix once it is available.
With the suspension, SilkAir's fleet of six Boeing 737 Max aircraft have been grounded. SilkAir had to cancel or adjust some flights, affecting about 300 passengers a day. These passengers have been offered either refunds or the option to be rebooked on other flights. If the suspension continues, more flights may be cancelled. SIA does not have the Boeing 737 Max aircraft.
Four foreign airlines were also operating the Boeing 737 Max aircraft to Singapore. As they have limited services to Singapore, they have been able to maintain normal operations using other aircraft types, except for Shandong Airlines which has had to suspend its operations to Singapore.
CAAS will continue to work with the Changi Airport Group, SIA and SilkAir and other affected airlines to minimise the impact on passengers.
asked the Minister for National Development
in circumstances where low-income parents who co-own their
HDB flats with their children decide to sell their flats to enable
their children to be removed as co-owners so that the children can
buy flats in their own names, whether HDB can allow these parents
to rely on their children's income in deciding whether or not to
grant a concessionary loan for a purchase of a second flat in the
parents' names.
: Mr Speaker, as part of credit assessment for housing loans, HDB and financial institutions will only consider flat buyers' incomes because they are the ones who are borrowing and will be servicing the mortgage.
For parents who co-own their HDB flats with their children and wish to purchase another flat when the children move out, they can consider right-sizing to a smaller unit that is within their budget. This may be more sustainable in the long-term, as compared to having their children service both the mortgage on their parents' flat as well as their own home.
Nevertheless, in the circumstance where the sales proceeds are not sufficient even for a right-sized unit, then HDB would be prepared to exercise flexibility and extend a housing loan to the parents on a case-by-case basis.
As each family may have unique circumstances, I would suggest that they approach HDB to explore the possible options so that they can sustain their housing arrangements.
asked the Minister for National Development what measures are taken to ensure that industrial buildings are not subject to unauthorised modifications beyond the initial inspections.
: Mr Speaker, building owners are required to obtain approvals and permits from relevant agencies before commencing any additions and alterations (A&A) works.
In addition, there is a monitoring regime in place for completed buildings. The Building and Construction Authority (BCA) imposes the Periodic Structural Inspection (PSI) regime to ensure that buildings are structurally safe. The PSI has to be carried out every 10 years for residential buildings and every five years for non-residential buildings, including those for industrial use. These on-site inspections have to be conducted by the Professional Engineers (PEs) engaged by the building owners. During the inspections, the PEs must also check for any A&A works to the structure of the building and report their findings to BCA. Any A&A works not in the original BCA-approved plans would be considered unauthorised.
Stern action will be taken against parties who are found to be involved in carrying out unauthorised works. Under the Building Control Act, offenders may be liable to a fine of $200,000 or a jail term of up to two years, or both. A PE who fails to perform his duties in carrying out the PSI according to the requirements may be liable to a fine of up to $20,000.
Members of the public can inform BCA if they come across any structures that they think are unauthorised.
asked the Minister for Finance (a) what is the Gini coefficient of Singapore for each year in the past 10 years when capital income is taken into account; (b) if such data is not available, whether inclusion of capital income is likely to increase or decrease Singapore's Gini coefficient; and (c) whether the Ministry will take into account capital income when reporting Singapore's Gini coefficient.
: Mr Speaker, Singapore computes the Gini coefficient based on household income from work. This data is available annually and enables the timely tracking of income inequality.
Collecting income data from sources other than work is more challenging. Such data are typically collected based on self-reporting by respondents and are more susceptible to measurement errors. This is why the Department of Statistics has thus far not included such data in its computation of the Gini coefficient.
Nevertheless, the Government will continue to explore ways to better measure and monitor income inequality. Regardless of the measurement issues, our approach remains to keep our social support measures progressive and targeted at the lower and middle income households.
: Mr Speaker, I thank the Minister for the reply. I do understand that we do include capital income once every five years in terms of our calculation for our Gini coefficient. If we can do it once every five years, why not do it every year? I also understand that, for example, all the other OECD countries do include capital income. So, why does Singapore not include this?
: Mr Speaker, I should clarify. I think Mr Louis Ng is mistaken. We do have surveys of income other than work in the household expenditure survey. It is not part of the Gini coefficient computation. So, that income is covered in the household expenditure survey which is done once every five years. As I have said just now, collecting data on income other than work is always fraught with issues, not just for us but for other countries as well. But we are continuing to see how the data can be better captured.
asked the Minister for Finance in respect of the tender awarded by the Ministry of Home Affairs to ST Marine for the construction of 12 aluminium-hulled patrol boats (a) why his Ministry's Standing Committee on Debarment (SCOD) did not extend the disbarment of companies from tendering for government contracts to cases where the companies or their senior executives had been convicted of corruption in private sector contracts; and (b) whether the notice of award was published no later than 72 days after the tender was awarded to ST Marine as required under the Government Procurement Regulations.
: Mr Speaker, corruption is an offence and is dealt with strictly under our laws. Enforcement is by the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (CPIB) and adjudication of liability and the imposition of penalties for breach of the laws is carried out by the courts. Companies or individuals convicted of corruption are thus penalised through the legal system. The penalties apply to cases involving both public and private sector-related contracts. The underlying rationale is because society, as a whole, is harmed by such conduct.
Debarment from participation in Government contracts is a separate and distinct exercise from court proceedings and serves a different purpose. Debarment is an administrative procedure by the Government to protect the Government’s interests as a service buyer, against those who have caused direct harm or losses to the Government. It does not duplicate the courts’ function of adjudication or punishment.
The grounds on which service providers can be debarred are made known publicly in the GeBIZ website and cover a variety of situations where Government interests have been harmed. These include, for example, failure of a supplier to meet critical contractual obligations to a Government agency, abandonment or termination of a Government contract due to contractor default, among others.
Specifically, with regard to corruption, CPIB can, where appropriate, recommend to the SCOD debarment action after a court decision which establishes that the contractor or any of its employees, directors, partners or sole proprietor had bribed a public sector officer or another person in connection with a Government agency or contract.
As can be seen from the above, there must be a nexus to Government-related contracts before debarment can be applied. The underlying rationale is to protect against suppliers who have caused direct harm or loss to the Government as a service buyer.
In the case involving ST Marine, CPIB investigations did not reveal any connection with a Government agency or contract. Hence, the circumstances in which debarment can be recommended under the policy parameters did not arise.
In this case, the charges and convictions were against the individuals involved, namely, ST Marine's former group financial controller and six other former senior executives. They were convicted in 2017 for offences committed in the period between 2000 and 2011, the most recent act thus being eight years ago. The individuals involved ceased to be employed by ST Marine since between 2004 and 2014.
The company itself, ST Marine, which is a separate legal entity, did not have any charges or convictions against it. A new Board of Directors of ST Marine was appointed as of 15 August 2018. The Police Coast Guard tender was awarded in November 2018.
The notice of award was published within 72 days from the tender award in accordance with the Government Procurement Regulations. In MHA’s reply to The Straits Times on 9 March 2019, MHA had clarified that the contract was awarded to ST Marine on 26 November 2018 and the notice of award was published on the GeBIZ website the next day on 27 November 2018. The date of award of the tender was initially incorrectly shown as 27 July 2018 on the GeBIZ website and this has been rectified.
: I thank the hon Minister for her very detailed response to my question. I just have a few supplementary questions to follow up.
Firstly, what would be the rationale for the SCOD when it undertakes debarment proceedings to only consider past corruption offences relating to Government contracts rather than private sector contracts? What would be the considerations to set past corruption offences involving private sector contracts at "Nil", to provide no consideration for that, and only to consider corruption related to previous Government contracts?
Secondly, is this something – I guess depending on the answer to the first question – that the SCOD will review in future to consider taking into consideration past corruption offences by the company or its senior officials and within a reasonable time – for private sector contracts, and not only to limit debarment considerations to Government contracts.
: Mr Speaker, I should clarify. Let us make a distinction between past convictions in relation to private sector contracts and past convictions in relation to public sector contracts.
So, past convictions in relation to public sector contracts – that is clear. For that, debarment would apply, and I had explained that the main purpose of debarment is to protect the interest of the Government by disqualifying suppliers that have caused the Government to suffer harm or loss from getting fresh contracts, both procurement and revenue contracts, from all Government agencies.
Now, this does not mean to say that the committees or people looking at the SCOD, looking at the contracts or whoever is awarding the tender, cannot consider past convictions of private sector contracts. You can, but that is not an exercise in debarment, under the debarment policy parameters. That would be an exercise in looking to see holistically whether there is a risk to contract performance, to contract integrity, and reputational risk. So, in other words, because the Parliamentary Question was filed with respect to debarment, and hence my response was on the policy parameters that apply to debarment.
But in terms of award of tender, the committees or whoever would be awarding the tender can look at it holistically, and take into account suppliers' track records which could include corruption convictions. But that is an exercise in relation to assessment of risk for contract performance and contract integrity, rather than an exercise of debarment.
: I thank the Minister for her reply. Just some further clarifications. I understand the Minister has said that, specifically with regard to the procedure for debarment, Government contracts – public sector contracts – are taken into consideration, not private sector contracts and there are other mechanisms or processes in procurement where private sector corruption in the past can be taken into account.
I would just like to sort of go deeper on this point: why cannot the debarment process run by SCOD take into account past private sector corruption offences? Why is it only taking into account past public sector corruption offences? Will that be something that the Government is prepared to review, going forward?
: May I enquire from the Member, when he asked if it can be taken into account, what is the actual purpose that the Member is suggesting that private sector convictions be taken into account? Is the purpose punitive? Or is the purpose some other purpose? I would be grateful for the clarification.
: I should just thank the Minister for her response. Just to clarify on that, my purpose is for the purpose of debarment because past public sector corruption cases are potential grounds for debarment because of various risks that the Government may be exposed to if the tender is awarded to that company. So, why would not past private sector corruption cases also similarly give rise to grounds for potential debarment under the SCOD debarment procedures?
: The Member may have misunderstood my question. My question was: in his context, what is the purpose of the debarment? As I have explained, the current policy rationale for the debarment is protection of the Government interest against harm or loss. So, when the Member suggests that there should be debarment in relation to private sector contracts, what is the underlying purpose of the debarment? Is it to punish the company? Is it to protect the Government because if it is to protect the Government, then there is not a nexus. So, I am just trying to understand the purpose for which he is suggesting you should have debarment so that I can address the question.
: I thank the Minister. The purpose for which I am suggesting the debarment can be considered is essentially protection of the Government's interest because if debarment can be considered for companies involved in past public sector offences. Well, if the company has been involved in past private sector corruption offences, then, presumably, that creates a possibility, that they may also expose the Government to some risk if they take on a public sector contract. So, my purpose is basically protection of the Government, and to have a debarment process that considers both Government and private sectors past corruption offences because past private sector corruption offences may be grounds to suppose that there is some risk even if that company were to undertake a Government contract.
: I thank the Member for his response and that actually fits into exactly the answer that I had given earlier.
So, if the purpose is adjudication and punishment, that is dealt with by the courts. Insofar as the purpose is to protect the Government's interest by preventing the supplier from getting fresh contracts, that is where debarment applies.
If the purpose is, as the Member has clarified, to guard against risk, that is addressed by taking into account the tender assessment holistically. As I had explained earlier, that is an exercise in assessment of risk of performance, or risk of integrity to the contract, or reputational risk. So, either way, the purpose is addressed, whether it be court, debarment or overall holistic assessment.
asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs (a) what are the benefits and implications of the recent agreement with Malaysia to suspend overlapping claims in Singapore's territorial waters off Tuas; and (b) when was the last occasion that foreign vessels had anchored in Singapore's territorial waters off Tuas.
: Mr Speaker, on 14 March 2019, Malaysia and Singapore agreed to revert the port limits to the status quo prior to 25 October 2018 and 6 December 2018 respectively. The Malaysian government vessels which have been illegally anchored in our waters since early December 2018 would have to move out. In keeping with past practice, no commercial activities or anchoring of ships would be allowed in this area. Our ships will continue to patrol and take appropriate enforcement actions within our territorial waters. If all these recommendations are implemented by 14 April 2019, then negotiations for maritime boundary delimitation in the area will start within one month thereafter. I need to stress that these measures shall be taken without prejudice to the respective maritime boundary claims of both sides.
We hope that the recommendations will be implemented as soon as possible within the agreed time frame. This will allow the ground situation to be de-escalated, and then both sides can embark on maritime boundary delimitation negotiations.
This is a process that will take time, but both sides are committed to negotiate in good faith, and in the event that we are unable to arrive at an amicable solution on delimitation, we may mutually agree to resort to an appropriate international third-party dispute settlement procedure on terms to be mutually agreed by the parties.
Overall, the agreement is a positive and concrete step forward for both countries, and is reflective of Singapore’s commitment to resolve our issues with Malaysia in a calm and rational and amicable manner, in accordance with international law, and to nurture this very important bilateral relationship whilst safeguarding our national interests.
: Just to clarify, Minister, so, there are no more foreign ships right now in our territorial waters off Tuas at this point of time.
: There are two Malaysian government vessels which I believe are still anchored there at this point in time, so the terms of the agreement have not been implemented yet.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs how can the Home Team draw lessons from the recent shooting incidents in Amsterdam and Christchurch to better prevent similar incidents in Singapore.
: The recent attacks in Utrecht and Christchurch are sombre reminders of the threat which radicalism and terrorism continue to pose. We condemn the attacks, and share the sorrow of those who have lost family members and loved ones.
The two incidents provide several lessons what countries should put in place to minimise the chances and impact of similar attacks.
First is the need to unequivocally reject and counter extremist ideology and rhetoric. They can spread widely via social media and breed hate and violence. The manifesto published by the Christchurch attacker reeked of the disdainful and derogatory language typically used in white supremacist materials. If allowed to propagate, such hateful discourse can build up a culture of hate and intolerance, and lead to violence. In Singapore, we take a firm and unforgiving stance against extremist expressions and speech to make sure that the ideologies they represent never take root. This includes working with partners such as the Religious Rehabilitation Group to refute radical religious teachings.
Second is the importance of firearms controls. A week after the Christchurch attacks, New Zealand proposed new laws to ban military-style semi-automatic weapons. We learnt our own lessons many decades ago. Today, unlawful possession of firearms is punishable with imprisonment and caning, and unlawful use is a capital offence.
Third, the authorities must be well prepared to stage a swift and effective response when an attack hits. The New Zealand Police apprehended the attacker within half an hour of the first call they received. Our Police have deployed In-Situ Reaction Teams (IRTs) at areas with high human traffic such as Orchard Road and Marina Bay. These IRTs provide quick first response and complement the Police’s Emergency Response Teams and Rapid Deployment Troops, who are specially trained and armed to deal with terrorist attacks. More IRTs will be deployed island-wide this year, to further shorten our response time.
The community has an equally important role. A key part entails being vigilant and reporting suspicious activity to the authorities early. This includes reporting self-radicalised individuals, of whom family members and friends are best placed to detect marked changes in behaviour, for example if they start promoting extreme and intolerant views.
It is equally important that the community knows how to respond should an attack occur. In both the Utrecht and Christchurch incidents, many public buildings were quickly locked down after the shootings began. The Home Team has worked with partner agencies to enhance the preparedness of our neighbourhoods, our schools, workplaces and community organisations. Exercises have been conducted including lockdown drills in schools.
But above all, the ability of a people to stand united and together, will determine whether such attacks succeed in their ultimate objectives.
Within hours of the Christchurch attack, people of various faiths rallied around their fellow Muslims. Buddhist groups offered prayers. Churches opened their doors to Muslims, whose mosques were closed. Despite it being the Sabbath, the holy day of the week for the Jews, synagogues were closed on the Saturday following the attack as a show of solidarity. The Sikh community transported family members of the victims to the burial grounds, and arranged langars, or free vegetarian meals, for those affected and attending the funerals.
Many individuals stepped forward with donations and helped out at the events. Students across New Zealand performed the Haka, a Maori ceremonial dance, as tributes to the victims and as a signal of communal unity. As a further display of solidarity, the Muslim call to prayer was broadcast across New Zealand on the Friday after the attack, and the entire country mourned together.
Should an attack happen here, we must likewise stand shoulder to shoulder, and show the attackers that we will not be cowed, that we will not let them divide us as a people, nor turn one Singaporean against the other.
The SGSecure movement launched in 2016 has greatly strengthened our preparedness as individuals and as a country, to deal with a terror attack. We have made good progress. For instance, three in four Singaporeans responded that they know what to do if they are caught at the scene of an attack. Almost all Singaporeans affirm that they will step up to help others who are affected in an attack, and see it as their responsibility to safeguard Singapore.
We will continue to press ahead with our SGSecure efforts to strengthen Singapore's preparedness and resilience against those who would do us harm.
[
Pursuant to Standing Order No 22(3), Written Answers to Question Nos 25-28, 30, 33, 35-38, 40-41, 43-46 and 48-51 on the Order Paper are reproduced in the Appendix. Question Nos 29, 31-32, 34, 39, 42 and 47 have been postponed to the next available sitting of Parliament
.]
: Order. Ministerial Statements. I propose to first take the Ministerial Statement by the Minister for Health, followed by the Ministerial Statement by the Minister for Home Affairs. Minister Gan Kim Yong.
: Mr Speaker, thank you for allowing me to speak to make a Statement on Protecting Patients' Interests and Supporting the Medical Community.
Sir, both the medical community and the public have raised serious concerns regarding two recent decisions of the Singapore Medical Council (SMC)'s Disciplinary Tribunals (DT), as well as a decision of the Court of Appeal in a civil suit against Changi General Hospital (CGH). Members have asked various questions on these cases, which I will address in this Statement.
Let me briefly outline these cases. The first decision was in respect of an orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Lim Lian Arn, who was alleged to have failed to obtain informed consent from his patient before performing a procedure, and was fined $100,000, the maximum fine permitted under the Medical Registration Act. SMC has taken steps to appeal the DT's decision. The Court will review this case and evaluate the decision of the DT including the appropriateness of the fine.
The second decision concerned a psychiatrist, Dr Soo Shuenn Chiang, who was alleged to have failed to take appropriate steps to verify the identity of his patient's family member before releasing a memorandum containing her sensitive medical information to the family member. He was fined $50,000. SMC has taken steps to pursue an appeal against the DT's decision in this case as well. On appeal, the Court will review the surrounding facts including the circumstances in which the memorandum was procured and obtained by a family member.
As both these cases are still before the Courts, I shall refrain from referring to them in detail. It will however be clear to Members that MOH is also deeply concerned with the decisions in both cases. MOH has asked SMC to consider an appeal and SMC has done so. The two DT decisions, as well as the uncertainty surrounding the current law on doctors' obligations, risk undermining the confidence of both the public and the medical profession. We must, and will, deal with the issues that have arisen to restore and ensure confidence.
The Court of Appeal’s decision in the civil suit concerned a case of negligence against CGH for delaying the diagnosis of a patient’s cancer. I am saddened to learn that the patient Ms Noor Azlin Abdul Rahman has just passed away this morning. Let me offer my deepest condolences to the family. My thoughts are with them. The hospital will extend our support to the family. The Court of Appeal's decision has been interpreted by the medical profession to mean that, in the majority of cases, radiologists are well placed to decide which specialist or hospital department should follow up on a radiological report with an adverse finding. This is different from the current general practice, which is to return the radiological and test reports to the doctor and team who had seen the patient, ordered the investigations and had the continuing obligation to care for the patient.
Radiologists are understandably worried that they do not have the same care relationship with patients and are not in a position to decide which department or specialist is most appropriate for the continuing care of the patient. Our lawyers have told us that the medical profession may not have interpreted the Court of Appeal's decision correctly. Nevertheless, we must deal with the medical profession’s concerns and clarify the position.
Four specific concerns arise from these cases: one, what constitutes proper informed consent; two, whether radiological reports with adverse findings should be returned to the doctors or teams who had ordered them, or should they be routed to another specialist department for follow-up; three, whether the convictions and sentences are fair and reasonable, and reflect practice realities on the ground; and four, how to remedy the weaknesses of the SMC DT disciplinary process.
We share all of these concerns. My Ministry will address them decisively, while always putting patient safety and welfare first. We have to act decisively because these concerns, if unresolved, will, over time, engender the practice of defensive medicine. This will not only affect doctors, but ultimately compromise the quality of medical care, raising medical costs and harming patient welfare. I will set out a broad overview of these issues and then outline the initiatives to address them.
Let me first briefly describe the current SMC disciplinary process. The SMC is a Statutory Board and a self-regulating body, made up of both elected and appointed medical professionals. Its primary objective is to protect the welfare and safety of patients by regulating the professional and ethical practice of registered medical practitioners and by upholding high standards in the medical profession.
When a patient makes a complaint, a Complaints Committee (CC), drawn from a panel of 100 senior doctors and 50 laypersons, reviews the complaint and decides on the appropriate further actions. When needed, the SMC will appoint a DT to hear the case. Both CCs and DTs are made up predominantly of doctors, aided by specialists who provide expert opinions, as well as legal professionals and laypersons, as appropriate. The SMC Council members do not sit on the DT, so that the DT can act independently of the SMC. Annually, the SMC receives an average of 170 complaints. Most are resolved at the CC stage with about 8% being referred to DTs.
This system is built on self-regulation. As professionals, doctors have to make care decisions in the best interests of their patients. More often than not, they have to rely on their professional judgement. Therefore, what is appropriate in each case is determined by their peers, taking into account what is acceptable practice.
It is important to maintain the confidence of both the doctors and the public in this system. Both must have full confidence in the transparency and fairness of the process and outcomes. However, the recent cases which I described earlier have cast doubts on this. We have to address these concerns directly, make the necessary changes and give appropriate guidance so that there is greater clarity and consistency.
I will now outline some of the main problems which have arisen in the operation of the current system. First, serious delays in the disciplinary process. Delays are unfair to the complainant who would be looking for closure. It is also unfair to the doctor, as it may prejudice the doctor's defence, affect his practice and livelihood, and cause unnecessary anxiety. It currently takes too long for a case to be heard. It takes up to two years and occasionally longer for the CC to reach a conclusion; and if a DT is convened, up to another two years to conclude the case, and occasionally even longer. If there is an appeal by either party to the Court of Three Judges, further time will be taken up. Whilst SMC has been making efforts to clear cases faster, the overall process generally takes too long and some cases experience prolonged delays that are egregious and wholly unacceptable.
Second, the SMC has faced challenges in engaging doctors to serve on the Complaints and Disciplinary Committees, or as experts. This is partly due to the small community of senior practitioners and partly due to the difficulty in securing the commitment of experienced practitioners to serve, because of the heavy time commitment and opportunity cost incurred. I am most grateful to the doctors who have served on our CCs and DTs. We will have to improve and strengthen the system to better support them as they carry out their duties.
Third, despite the guidance in SMC's Ethical Code and Ethical Guidelines (ECEG), there is wide variance in interpreting standards of care. Whilst the Guidelines cannot cater for all scenarios, we need greater clarity on the application of the standards in specific situations, such as the communication of medical information to patients’ family members and the taking of informed consent.
Fourth, there is the issue of consistency and fairness of sentences meted out. Some sentences are not commensurate with the circumstances of the case. Despite their best efforts, some DTs are too lax, whilst others are too draconian and the SMC has had to appeal to the Court against the sentences meted out in these cases. The two recent DT cases, for instance, involve unexpectedly high fines. But there have also been cases where DTs imposed sentences that were too low, and the SMC has had to appeal to the High Court to increase these sentences.
My Ministry will review the SMC disciplinary process. We have to do a thorough review of the existing structure and process, and consider what is the best way in which complaints against doctors should be dealt with, which will minimise the current problems. We must seek to achieve clearer and more consistent outcomes faster, and which both the public and the medical community will have confidence in.
I have appointed a workgroup comprising doctors, legal professionals and other persons with relevant expertise to completely review the SMC's complaints and disciplinary processes. The workgroup is co-led by Associate Professor Ng Wai Hoe, Medical Director of National Neuroscience Institute and Deputy Chairman Medical Board at SingHealth, and Ms Kuah Boon Theng, a Senior Counsel, who specialises in medico-legal cases.
The workgroup has a broad mandate to review the entire process and make recommendations to my Ministry. They will consult widely. A series of engagement sessions have already been planned. The first few town-halls were conducted last week with SingHealth on Thursday and Gleneagles on Friday, and another session is planned with NUHS this week. These consultations will continue as we want to canvass as many views as possible. The workgroup’s recommendations are expected by the end of the year.
In addition to the workgroup, MOH had also set up a Sentencing Guidelines committee to set out principles and guidance for sentences, to ensure greater consistency and fairness in the sentences meted out by the DTs. This committee has started its work and is expected to also report by the end of the year.
Let me now address the issue of informed consent. This is the process by which doctors provide patients with relevant and material information about the recommended course of treatment, potential risks of the treatment and possible alternatives, to enable the patient to make an informed decision with regard to his care options. The law on informed consent has, for a long time, been based on the well-known Bolam test, which has been consistently affirmed in Singapore, including by the Court of Appeal in the case of Gunapathy in 2002. This landmark decision set out the standard clearly. Over the years, the test was clear and well understood by the medical profession.
In 2017, the Court of Appeal departed from its earlier decision of Gunapathy and applied a modified version of the test formulated in the UK case in Montgomery versus Lanarkshire Health Board. The Court has ruled that a doctor, in taking proper informed consent, has to provide such information as that particular patient objectively requires.
The feedback from the medical profession is that doctors are not sure as to how to apply the new legal test in practice settings. There is uncertainty and concern among doctors as to exactly what information would be considered to be relevant and material from the patient's perspective, and when and how consent needs to be taken. The recent case where Dr Lim Lian Arn was fined $100,000 for failing to take informed consent for a procedure has brought this issue to the fore.
In the current climate of uncertainty, there is a real risk that medical practitioners will adopt defensive medicine. There is evidence that this is already happening. Fearing that they might be called out should a complication occur, doctors are likely to overwhelm patients with voluminous information on multiple unlikely risks, protecting themselves legally but confusing patients. This would be highly detrimental to Singapore's healthcare system and will damage the trust between doctors and their patients. We should guard against turning into the kind of society where doctors care more about not being sued or disciplined by the professional body than about the patients' well-being. This is a well-travelled road elsewhere with very predictable consequences. The US is a prime example of a healthcare system where large sums are awarded for medical negligence, a significant fraction of healthcare costs goes towards medical indemnity insurance, and patients and society as a whole end up bearing these costs.
We will address this and provide clarity and guidance in two ways. First, the workgroup that is reviewing the SMC Disciplinary Processes will also review and study the legal and practical applications of taking informed consent. They will evaluate the local practice in different settings as well as study the practices in other jurisdictions. The workgroup will also consult widely on this and seek views from the medical community as well as the public. It will make recommendations to the Government on every aspect of informed consent and give guidance to the medical profession on what, where and how in taking informed consent. The intent is to address the needs of the patients while providing the medical community with clear practical guidelines so that doctors do not have to second guess what is needed in each case. It will also consider whether legislation will be necessary in order to achieve these objectives and to set out the test to be applied.
We should, however, remember that the relationship between the doctor and patient is not only unique in each case, but also dynamic. It will evolve over time, and change with each diagnosis and advice given. It is therefore not possible nor desirable to be overly prescriptive in such guidance. There must always be sufficient flexibility in any test or guidance which we formulate, so that, ultimately, patient interests are best served. Doctors know that patient welfare must be paramount.
Second, to provide additional practice guidance to the community, MOH intends to issue legally binding clinical practice guidance in specific areas. We aim to give healthcare professionals more certainty on aligning their practices with the rest of the healthcare community and on discharging their ethical and legal obligations to their patients. For example, on the issue of informed consent, the guidance would explain what nature of information would be considered to be relevant and material to patients.
Such guidance will not be confined to the issue of informed consent. For example, guidance can also be issued on how healthcare institutions and professionals should handle requests for assistance from patients’ next-of-kin and, in particular, verify the identities of the next-of-kin, a question raised by Dr Chia and Dr Lim. The approach will be balanced, protecting patients' interests and welfare, yet being fair to doctors. There should also be consideration for practical issues such as what to do in emergency situations. MOH will engage the medical community and public before issuing the guidance.
Sir, as I said earlier, the Court of Appeal has also made some suggestions in the civil suit against CGH on the responsibilities of radiologists and institutions. The Court of Appeal’s central concern in that case was to ensure that radiological reports with adverse findings are followed up with appropriate speed and care. This ensures patients’ safety, and we agree entirely with that. The question, however, is how best to achieve this.
Arising from that decision, healthcare professionals and institutions have told us that they need clarity on the level of responsibility that radiologists bear. They also need clarity as to whether radiological reports with adverse findings should be returned to the doctors or teams who had ordered them, or should they be routed to another specialist department for follow-up. The position hitherto has been that radiologists are not expected to bear any primary care responsibility when there are adverse reports, and that such reports should be routed back to the doctor(s) who ordered the tests. That has worked well for us, and my Ministry believes that this is probably the best approach.
We will consider the position carefully. My Ministry will also study the existing legislation, with a view to setting out in legislation what should be the legal and ethical responsibilities of the doctors involved and the institutions, and how reports with adverse findings should be routed. That should give greater clarity to the community.
Sir, to conclude, the medical community that we wish to have is built on the mutual trust and respect of the patients and the public. Doctors are expected to uphold the highest possible standards of professional and safe medical practice where patients' interests is always at the core. Patients must trust their doctors and be able to rely on them to look after their interests and well-being. Our doctors in turn need to be able to practise in an environment where they have clear guidance, and are not burdened with the uncertainties and vagaries of unwarranted sanctions or litigation. We have quite a lot of work to do to achieve this, but we are confident that we can do so.  We will work through the initiatives described earlier to build a better healthcare system for all.
: Mr Speaker, let me thank the Minister for the Statement. I just want to follow up in the sense that there must be current cases that are still under review by the DT. So, will the work of the DT still carry on currently under the current regulations? Or will it be differed until the new rules emerge at the end of the year?
: The current cases under the DT must continue otherwise there will be further undue delay. However, SMC and the MOH will look into how we can provide greater support to the DT and the process and to streamline wherever possible so that the process will be smoother and the judgement and the decision of the DTs will be more considered.
: I have some concern to raise to the Minister. I lodged a complaint to SMC recently. I was told that I needed to wait for three to four months to see a commissioner to make a statutory declaration. After that, I have to wait for another at least nine months for CC to look into the case. So, in view of the huge backlog which I understand that SMC is trying very hard to clear, is there a current immediate plan to triage some of these complaints so that we do not have errant prescribers that continue to practise and affect public's safety?
: Yes, in fact the SMC when they receive a complaint, they will also look at the nature of the complaint. Some of the complaints have certain elements of urgency and they will deal with them more urgently. And if the Member has a specific case in mind, do let me know. We can take it up and see whether we could expedite the case if it is of an urgent nature.
: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from Minister on the two cases of Dr Lim's and Dr Soo's fines. May I ask Minister whether his concurrence that fines meted out to these two doctors did not really commensurate with the offences. Therefore, going forward, how do you rectify this problem?
: As I have mentioned in my speech, we have set up a committee on sentencing guidelines and the committee will then develop a set of guidelines to help guide DTs in meting out their sentences. For the two specific cases, we have asked SMC to lodge an appeal to the Court of Appeal and because the cases are still being heard. I will refrain from commenting specifically on the two cases.
: I just want to ask considering the number of cases that SMC that has to deal with, are we also looking upstream into the medical education in terms of getting them to know it while they are actually being trained to be doctors. Instead of looking at it now at the SMC level. Both are important but I am just wondering whether you are also looking upstream.
: Indeed, that is the case and therefore currently even within the current curriculum of our medical training, ethical practices are part of the syllabus our medical students have to go through. At the same time, we are also strengthening our ethical practice and guidelines, as mentioned in my speech, to provide greater guidance to the practitioners. As you would appreciate, the medical landscape changes over time, evolves over time, new procedures, new treatment will evolve and doctors and patients have to decide whether they are appropriate or not. Therefore, the guidelines have to change over time as well and that is why it is an on-going process. As I mentioned in my speech, we are looking into how we can provide greater guidance to both practising doctors as well as patients. So, both sides will have a better understanding of what is acceptable practice.
: Ministerial Statement. Minister for Home Affairs.
: Mr Speaker, Sir, on 7 March 2019, the Government cancelled the permit for a concert due to be performed by Watain. Eight days later on 15 March, a white man shot and killed 50 people – all Muslim – in two mosques in Christchurch. Three days after that, on 18 March, a man of Turkish origin shot and killed three people in the Netherlands. Five days after that, on 23 March, ISIS' last stronghold fell.
Four events, four countries, 16 days. All four tell us how different societies deal with race and religion.
Is there a larger picture showing inter-connections among the four events? I will suggest to this House that there is such a larger picture, with possible lessons.
Sir, hate speech, racial, religious harmony. This is an issue of considerable consequence to our society. I therefore propose to make a Ministerial Statement and it is important that we hear Members of Parliament.
I will move a Motion later for my Statement to be considered by Parliament and that will allow Members of Parliament to speak on the Statement. I hope that we can reach some level of clarity, agreement, on how we should frame, apply, our rules on speech, so as to maintain racial, religious harmony.
But one point to note, as a matter of record, regulation of content of entertainment, in general, is one of MCI's important functions. Ensuring, among other things, that we deal with hate speech, to prevent conflict, violence between people of different races, so as to maintain internal security is one of my Ministry's core functions. My Ministry as a whole, and ISD, in particular, spend a lot of time on this. So, my speech will focus on this latter aspect: hate speech, racial and religious harmony.
I will cover the following areas.
First, I will deal with what hate speech is. An example of hate speech: political leader calling members of a racial, religious group "vermin" that "needs to be exterminated". I will share using research in neuroscience how hate speech interacts with the brain, how logic and reasoning are ineffective.
Second, I will touch on the experience of other countries, how they have attempted to deal with hate speech.
Third, l will discuss offensive speech as opposed to hate speech and our approach towards it.
Fourth, I will discuss the Christchurch shooting and the lessons that we can learn from it.
Fifth, I will discuss specifically the cancellation of the Watain concert.
Sixth, I will deal with the arguments that have been made against our approach in dealing with offensive speech.
And finally, I will discuss the role of social media in propagating hate speech.
Sir, with your permission, may I display some slides on the LED screens? I think this has been discussed, some specific slides.
: Yes, please. [
Slides were shown to hon Members.
]
: Sir, as first proposition, I assume, and certainly hope there will be unanimous agreement in this House that we must preserve racial, religious harmony in Singapore. Assuming we do, then we have to consider: first, the degree to which hate speech can impact on racial and religious harmony; second, the steps that should be taken to deal with hate speech; and third, the continuum between hate speech and speech which is offensive on race and religion.
There is an overlap between the two. So, what do we do about offensive speech?
So, let me start with hate speech. It has been defined as "all forms of expression which spread, incite, promote, or justify racial hatred, xenophobia, or other forms of hatred based on intolerance."
It can fall into different categories in different platforms. For example, religious hate speech can be very powerful; political hate speech can be very powerful, especially if the politician is charismatic. It can be in general discourse, in the mass media. It can be as part of entertainment like music, theatre. This list is illustrative. It is not intended to be exhaustive.
What impact can hate speech have? With your permission, Mr Speaker, I have asked the Clerk of Parliament to place handouts on the seats, the various steps, so that I do not need to read out some of the stuff. [
Handouts were distributed to hon Members
.]
Look at Tab 1, hate speech leads to deep social divides. Repeated hate speech increases people's prejudices, feelings of being threatened, and propensity to violence. How does it do so? Hate speech desensitises individuals. It normalises behaviour which we will otherwise consider unacceptable. It stokes anger and fear. It provides a surge of stress hormones. It engages the amygdala, the brain centre for perception of threat.
Once that is done, it is harder for people to control their emotions; think before they act. People do not have to be extremists to be moved to violence by incendiary rhetoric. Studies show just about any person could be susceptible under the right conditions. A psychologist from Princeton has shown that distrust of an out-group, linked to anger and impulses towards violence, against that group.
Most people, most of us, are moral creatures. So, you picture morality as being in a gear. At times, it can be get disengaged and get to neutral. Morality can get disengaged when we redefine our actions as honourable and we believe that we are doing is a matter of honour. We believe the victims are deserving of their punishment – they are an out-group, and not quite human.
Dehumanisation then takes place. Distrust and contempt against the out-group can be built up. Neuro-imaging studies showed that you then do not think of these people as social beings. So, the lesson is that when hate speech is systematically developed, it becomes socially acceptable to discriminate and to oppress.
So, the important lesson is that civilisation must intervene early to prevent hate speech from becoming normalised.
Once it is normalised, dehumanisation of the out-group is very difficult to reverse. Let me set out some real world consequences of hate speech.
Of course, a classic and extreme example is the Holocaust – how hate speech was used to mobilise an entire population to commit terrible crimes. Jews were considered vermin by Nazi Germany, requiring fumigation by the Aryan state.
Rwanda is another example. In 1994, 800,000 were killed. A Hutu mother beat to death a child who lived next door because the government had told her Tutsis were her enemies, even as the child was looking at her, with its innocent eyes and they had grown up next door to each other. She justified the slaughter as "doing a favour" to the child because he had already been orphaned because the parents had been killed.
You have Pakistan: the concept of honour, shame involved. If you are a true "Muslim", a “hero", then you will be a person who has the courage to defend Islam and the Prophet by killing "kafirs". And that happened to the former Governor of Punjab, Salman Taseer, who was assassinated by his own security officer because he took positions which were considered against Islam.
You have Sri Lanka where Buddhist priests painted a picture of Buddhism as being under threat and promoted hate and violence. The Group's leader, Gnanasara Thero, suggested Halal certification is an "evil conspiracy", "spreading across the island in various guises, casting its dark shadow."
So, one could ask: what do these countries have to do with Singapore? Sri Lanka was ahead of Singapore in most indices in the late 1950s. We went there to study their systems. Why is it that religious leaders in Singapore do not say these things? It is not preordained. In fact, in Singapore, even the population opposes religious leaders saying these things. I will show you a survey which shows that.
But why is that so? It is because of our laws and over the last 54 years, and the many many things we have done to try and build a society based on mutual respect and harmony.
You know what happened in Myanmar. Hate speech was directed at the Muslim Rohingyas. Leader of one of the movements called mosques "enemy bases", urged Buddhists to boycott Muslim businesses and not have inter-faith marriages.
When you have this situation, logic, reason will not work because an entire architecture of hate has been built up. The hateful emotions have been engaged. The marketplace of ideas does not work in these circumstances.
In 2018, two PhD students did a study in Warwick University, they showed that hate speech triggered hundreds of violent crimes against refugees in Germany. But they also saw a pattern. You take a place where you can expect to see crimes against refugees – in fact, there have been crimes against refugees. But where hate speech becomes limited for a period of time, that violence decreased sharply.
Germany's Federal Ministry of the Interior's 2015 Annual Report says: "Uninhibited hate speech on the Internet can lead to individual or collective radicalisation." I am not going to read all of it. It is on the screen but it makes a point – hate speech creates "a pressure to take immediate action and it creates fertile soil for militancy and violence." The rest of it is on the screen.
Let us look at songs which spread hate. Studies have shown that music can create powerful emotions in the listener. Listening to violent music stimuli, even without lyrics or videos, can cause greater aggression than listening to no music at all.
Songs have been a very powerful medium for spreading hate speech. "Hate music" has been used to label, devalue, persecute, scapegoat particular groups of people, often minorities. White racialists use White Power music too. They use it to deny humanity of African-Americans. In fact, the way African Americans are dehumanised is to depict them in drawings, with stereotypical physical features which robs them of their humanity. And then, through music as well. Some examples of lyrics, they are on the screen, I do not want to read it out, partly because of the language. You look at references to "niggers running amok", "you cannot come up here anymore because now you are faced with the nigger foe". Hence, a lot more not mentionable, not least in Parliament.
In the 1990s, there was a study of skinheads in the US to determine factors that were able to distinguish terrorist skinheads from non-terrorist ones. White Power music was found to be important to the construction of the identity of the terrorist skinheads. Approximately 91% of terrorist skinheads limited their music consumption to White Power bands. The German government has described skinhead music as the number one gateway to violence.
Members may have heard of the Malay Power music festival in Malaysia. The Malay Power movement believes that Malaysia should be an exclusively Malay nation, immigration should end, non-Malays should be expelled.
A Malay Power band says this, and I quote, "the lesson that we can learn from Nazism is that we can take extreme racist action if the position of the Malays is affected by these factors." Just across the Causeway. A music fest featuring Malay Power nationalists called Rebellion Fest, was cancelled just this month in Malaysia.
Sir, it is all around us. There is nothing special about us that these things cannot happen here.
In summary, hate speech denigrates the out-group and says the out-group is the source of the problems; dehumanises the out-group, making violence against them justified.
The Christchurch killings were motivated by white supremacist ideology. White supremacist graffiti covered the attacker’s rifles. The Prime Minister of New Zealand has called for a global fight against right wing extremists. Meanwhile, Islamic militant groups are using the Christchurch attacks to push their own message of hate, that the West is at war with Islam.
So, what should we do about this? Before we look at Singapore, it is useful to look very briefly at how some other countries have dealt with hate speech.
If you look at the US, speech is a very high threshold. Before you can prohibit speech, it must be directed to inciting or producing "imminent lawless action" and is likely to incite or produce such action. So, it must be of such a nature as to produce "imminent lawless action" and it is likely to incite the production of such action. So, very, very high threshold. Even speech advocating violence by Ku Klux Klan is protected under their free speech rules. So, you see speeches which are anti-Semitic, speeches which denigrate African-Americans, the Hispanics, politicians who denigrate religions and ethnic groups. One example is Steve King, a US congressman. He has praised Mr Wilders from Netherlands who has in turn called the Prophet “a paedophile, a mass murderer, a terrorist and madman” and has said the Quran is worse than Mein Kampf and has called for the closure of mosques. So, Steve King praises him.
In Europe, some countries there have broader prohibitions than American. In 2018, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) gave an important decision. The Austrian courts had convicted a lady who had called the Prophet Muhammad a paedophile. She appealed. The ECHR ruled that the conviction did not violate her freedom of expression. It did not extend that far. It said the right to freedom of expression has got to be balanced against the right of others to have their religious feelings protected.
The German Criminal Code criminalises incitement of hatred against, or insult of, a racial or religious group. The same section also criminalises the glorification of Nazi rule. Just note that in the German Criminal Code it covers insults which may not quite be hate speech but could be offensive speech. I will come back to this later.
In the UK, it is a crime to incite hatred on the grounds of religion. But you can in the UK ridicule, insult, abuse any religion, beliefs, practices or the followers of such religions. So, in the UK in 2018, more than one quarter of all Britons – that is more than 12 million people – witnessed hate speech. Majority were on social media, involved anti-immigrant, anti-refugee language, racist abuse, anti-Muslim comments.
So, the UK now finds itself fighting on two fronts – right-wing extremists as well as Islamic extremists. The security services are investigating a possible contact between the Christchurch gunman and the right-wing extremists in the UK. The UK's Lead Anti-Extremism Commissioner has said and I quote, "frightening amount of legal extremist content is available online", fuelling far-right activism.
At one point, a preacher, Abu Hamza, was Britain’s most high profile hate preacher. He was finally convicted in 2006 for soliciting murder, inciting racial hatred in his inflammatory "sermons". He had been preaching since 1997. In his sermons, he described Jews as the enemy of Islam. He told followers to bleed the "enemies of Islam". They should not rest until they have created a Muslim state.
Britain, of course, has an admirable, long tradition of free speech. You argue different positions, you get clarity. But hate speech like this targeting ethnic, religious communities does not appeal to logic. It is not capable of being rebutted by logic. The intention is that the recipients of hate speech should be filled with hate and they are turned into hate machines in the false belief that God requires that. How does logic and open debate counter this?
So, Britain's lax approach attracted a lot of people like Abu Hamza who went about spreading his message of hate and London became a centre for many of these hate mongers. Finsbury Park mosque where Abu Hamza preached has been described as a global magnet for militants. From late 1990s to 2003, the attendees included Richard Reid, the shoe bomber for whom you can thank for having to take off your shoes each time you go past in an airport. Zacarias Moussaoui, one of the 9/11 attackers.
So, in New Zealand, shortly after the Christchurch incident, New Zealand’s chief censor banned the shooter’s manifesto, "The Great Replacement". The basis for the banning is that the manifesto tries to inspire murder and terrorism. That has now led to a debate, "Oh free speech is being curtailed." The usual arguments. "Better to trust people to form their own conclusions than suppress hate speech altogether." The shooter himself confessed he developed his views from the Internet. He said, "You will not find the truth anywhere else." The conclusion he formed: kill as many Muslims as possible.
The UN last month, February 2019, the UN Secretary-General called hate speech a "menace to democratic values, social stability, peace." He pointed out the dangers of allowing hate speech to move into mainstream. He said "With each broken norm, the pillars of humanity are weakened." He has assigned a team to scale up the response to hate speech and present a global plan of action, on a fast-track basis.
We are told regularly that we should be more like the US and UK, the Gold Standard for Free Speech. But their experiences suggest that serious consequences can follow when you are lax about hate speech.
What is our experience? Our experience recognises that race and religion are fault lines, they are gut issues. They can be very emotive. If you go to a 2016 survey by CNA and IPS, race and religion play a large role in personal decisions of Singaporeans. If people feel that their race, religion is under attack, the potential for violence increases. If I can quote Mr Lee Kuan Yew, "No amount of troops would be able to stop the trouble if there was real hatred between the different communities. The decisive factor would be dependent upon the goodwill between neighbours."
We prohibit hate speech. We also take quick action when there is hate speech and the speaker will be advised to stop. ISD will take action depending on the severity of what is being said and the possible consequences. Of course, the person who conceptualised, crystallised our approach is the late Mr Lee Kuan Yew. In 1999, reflecting back, he said this – it is Tab 3 in what we have handed out. He talked about having done the easier part, getting people into housing estates, schools, putting them together. How it will be much more difficult to get people to accept each other and that it just takes one mishap. And he talked about fault lines, and how it is going to take a long time, 20, 30, 40 years to work on this and why we need to find common ground, tolerant, accommodative, take a multiracial, multilingual, multi-religious, multicultural approach and that one race or religion does not foist itself on another.
Prime Minister Lee in 1987 also set out our approach, that is Tab 4 in your bundle. He pointed out the most straightforward way to destabilise Singapore is to have racial and religious discord. He said never assume that free and open discourse will magically lead to truth and enlightenment. Members will recall what I said earlier about logic not coming into play in this situation. He referred to the 1950 riots, the 1964 riots, the 1969 riots and the Singapore Government's unwavering commitment in pursuing multiracial policies, taking action against chauvinist agitators and he said – this is an important line – "in race, we come up against atavistic human instincts which will take generations to overcome. They can be whipped up and once blood has been shed, the years of nation building we have done will come to naught.”
The experience of other countries shows when you are clear, you have firm laws prohibiting hate speech, you deal fairly with all communities, then you can start building a multiracial, multi-religious, harmonious society. I think, I hope there will be agreement in this House that hate speech, whatever form it takes – religious, political, entertainment – in all its different forms is unacceptable and we should continue to prohibit hate speech and deal with it firmly, in the way we have done so far.
That brings me to my next point. How should we deal with offensive speech? Speech does not fall into neat categories – hate, non-hate, offensive. It is a continuum, a spectrum. There can be acceptable commentary on race, religion – offensive speech and hate speech. Offensive speech can segue into hate speech and they overlap, obviously. If you refer back to definition of hate speech which I gave earlier, it covers offensive speech and remember the German Criminal Code which covers insults.
At the same time, there may be factual observations which are necessary. For example, in a multiracial, multi-religious society, sometimes you have to speak frankly about the issues facing one community or another and to focus on the issues and to try and find solutions. There may be a need to point out the differences between the races for a variety of public policy reasons. That sort of speech is necessary, unavoidable. I am not referring to that here. The point is: should we allow offensive speech in general mainstream discourse, even if it is not hate speech?
Say, for example, you can regularly, in public discourse including theatre, songs, politics, religion – you can joke, you can insult, you can laugh at, denigrate people of another race, another religion, what do you think will happen? Take offensive theatre, the Ventriloquist Jeff Dunham, US, his puppets, include Jose the Mexican immigrant, Achmed the dead terrorist. You can imagine what he would do with these. He peddles in offensive views of various races and women, performs to sell-out crowds in America, he is one of the highest paid comedians in the world. Audience: mainly white Americans.
Members may remember a lady, Amy Cheong, who made nasty comments about Malays, their weddings in void decks. You can see it on the screen, I am not going to read it out. You can see how offensive and and repulsive it is. If this sort of expression becomes common in public discourse, what happens?
If we normalise offensive speech, after a while the tone and texture of public discourse will change. Giving offence to others will become normalised. Offensive speech, in the long run, can also lead to dehumanisation.
There is emerging work in the field of neuroscience. That if an individual observes another member of his own species experiencing pain, he would experience non-conscious neuro-simulation which leads to empathy. But such empathy is only triggered when the person is part of your in-group.
Offensive speech, which implies that their target lacks morals, lacks intelligence, lacks dignity, in fact, is even more insidious because listeners may get a false sense that they are not internalising these sort of descriptions because they are funny. But you are being drip-fed the notion that the out-group is stupid, ignorant, immoral, sinful and, ultimately, leading to dehumanisation. When you think of them as subhuman, therefore you may no longer be bound by moral constraints. Subconsciously, the brain will not feel empathy for them.
It is a slower process compared with hate speech. Hate speech moves on turbo charge; offensive speech is on the same trajectory but slower. It can take time. But end result is the same.
If you look at our pledge and the ideals, "We the citizens of Singapore, pledge ourselves as one united people, regardless of race, language and religion". How can we be one united people when everyday it is accepted that one race or another, one religion or another, can be publicly insulted, ridiculed and attacked?
Over time, the effect will be felt in every aspect of life – schools, jobs, neighbourhoods, politics. The environment will be conducive for discrimination, eventually violence. That is why we have restrictions on offensive speech, even when it is, strictly speaking, not hate speech.
This is an important point and I hope this is a point on which Members in this House can agree.
Some people asked me what is the purpose of this Motion because they think that at the end of it, we must have some legislation. No. This is a debate simpliciter; we set out our approach, we set out what has guided our approach. We want to hear the Members of Parliament because it is important for the next generation of Singaporeans to understand a bit of the history, to see what the ideals are, and how we should go forward. If people want the approach to be changed, then we should hear it in the House and that will educate the young people one way or the other. So, it is important that we have a proper discussion. That is the only purpose of this debate and Motion.
If we agree that there must be restrictions on offensive speech, then the question is what should be the extent of the restrictions? On this, do we think that Singaporeans are sui generis, that unlike others, we will not engage in offensive speech and hate speech because that is our inherent nature? Do we believe that? If we had not tried so hard for so long, to keep it under check, through laws and work very hard on racial and religious harmony, will we have the situation we have today?
Let me give you a few examples. This is in Tab 5 of your bundle. In 2009, a couple was charged for distributing highly offensive material on the Prophet, on Islam, and they sent it to Muslims. Nicholas Lim, young man, he made a post by reference to Malays, in response to a letter in the Straits Times' Forum page, "Can cabs carry uncaged pets?" Benjamin Koh, he made a posting, "Muslims are pigs. Mosques are brothels", displayed a pig's head picture on a halal lookalike logo. Gan Huai Shi, "Malays are rodents", ridiculed pilgrimage to Mecca. And, of course, Amy Cheong again, she was a Malaysian residing in Singapore.
I can give you other examples but I can also say, thankfully, it is much, much less in Singapore compared with other countries. Most people will think this sort of speech as unacceptable. Again, why have we not had the levels of such speech that you find in other countries?
Our position so far has been very practical and nuanced. We take the view that offensive speech should generally not be allowed in public discourse.
And the current legal framework – I am not going to go into it – but the Penal Code, sections 298, 298A, the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act, section 8, the Sedition Act, sections 3 and 4, set out the legal framework. But as I have said repeatedly, the legal framework is just the legal framework. You got to work with people to also internalise it in day-to-day living, the lived reality of Singaporeans.
This legal framework, however, requires us to assess, inter alia, the impact of the offensive words on the feelings of the targeted groups. How do we approach it?
We approach it this way. First, we look at the words, the material – how offensive are they? Second, we look at what is the likely impact of the speech: how would, for example, the community, which is the target of the offensive speech, react?
In this context, let me make one point clear again. I am speaking about offensive speech in relation to race, religion and in the context of preserving racial, religious harmony, preventing unrest, violence.
In a broader context, material may be offensive for other reasons – social mores, values, child abuse and so on.
The regulation of content in the broader context is handled by IMDA. MHA deals, more narrowly, with prevention of violence, the security aspects arising from offensive speech and directed at racial and religious divides.
Let me now deal with these two points.
First, we look at the words themselves. Are the words, in themselves, derogatory, offensive, insulting to a particular race or religion? I have given various illustrations of offensive words. Again, I really do not want to read them out. It is in Tab 6. Amos Yee, for example, talking about the Muslim community, Tab 6 on the handouts that you have, "They follow a sky wizard, they are dumb. He is a paedophile", and he gives a four-letter description of Christians; described Buddhists, Taoists. Of course, the US has given him asylum; we are quite happy about that.
If you want illustrations of offensive lyrics, again, I do not need to read them but it is in Tab 7, and it is also on the screen. You have "Hozier – Take me to Church", "I'll worship like a dog at the shrine of your lies" and so on. You can see there is plenty of materials all around.
So, what is the second factor that we consider? What is the likely impact of the speech? Who says it? It has more salience, for example, if said from the pulpit or at an election rally.
Consider the possible range of the different types of actions: religious leaders criticising another religion, telling his people that people of a particular religion should be ostracised; a political leader saying people of a certain religion, race, should not have rights in Singapore, these people are not good for Singapore; throwing a pig's head into a mosque. It happened in Philadelphia in 2015. The mosque also received a voicemail: "God is a pig. God is pork." It has happened in regional countries as well, throwing of pigs' heads into mosques; entertainment which is denigrating and disrespectful of a race or religion.
The impact, therefore, will be different, depending on who says it and the context. We also consider the occasion, the nature of the event; and the reach: there is a difference between saying it to 50 people in a private setting compared with publicising it generally. These factors are not exclusive.
Assessment of the impact is partly subjective based on the nature of the words, the other factors, likely impact on the targeted community. We also have to accept different religions have entirely different histories, traditions, theologies and that shape their outlook, even today. Each group reacts differently to different things.
So, when considering impact, it is not just immediate reaction. Other key issues are the security implications of the reaction and that can be immediate, it could also be longer term, by deepening fault lines, creating more tension. That is the context of the earlier part of my speech.
I do not want to repeat all of that but as long as you understand, this part fits in with what I said earlier. So, we have to assess. The Government is neutral. We proactively accommodate different groups. We recognise their different histories, traditions and we make practical adjustments. On that basis, we take a practical approach, assess the impact of reaction of the different communities.
It often involves assessment of potential reaction of the targeted community when we have to decide to allow or ban something.
I will also caution we have to assess the impact, reaction of the majority in the specific community and the security implications of that opinion, which I have referred to earlier. We have to assess where does the weight of mainstream opinion lie. We cannot be directed by the viewpoint of a person, or persons who are extremely sensitive. Really, the approach has to be guided by common sense. Again, I would like to hear from Members, should we change this approach?
There are two possibilities which will allow an absolute, objective approach. Ban everything that is deemed insulting, offensive by anyone, or allow everything that is insulting, offensive, and I have explained why that will eventually lead to trouble.
Members will see that either absolute approach is really not doable. So, I think Members will probably agree with me that the absolute approach is undesirable, so that brings up back to the pragmatic approach that the Government takes as the only tenable one for our society. It can be a bit messy but it has worked so far with relative success and with a bit of give and take.
So, how has this approach been applied in practice? Let us look at books. We banned Satanic Verses in 1989. It is considered a literary work by many. However, every Muslim country banned it. Our mainstream Muslim community took offence.
But we have allowed other books, films even when other religious communities were unhappy, based also on our security assessments. For example, western traditions accept wider levels of contestation. And Singaporeans, I think, will agree that it is unthinkable to ban a lot of western literature and philosophy because some may find it objectionable. For instance, would we ban Bertrand Russell's "Why am I not a Christian?", because it is critical of the faith? Of course not. Would we proscribe Edward Gibbons, "Decline and Fall of Roman Empire", because it had a famous section detailing what he thought were the deleterious effects of Christianity on Civilisation? Again, we do not ban that.
We have to take into account the context. Here, the context of what is acceptable in Western traditions is relevant. We are not as liberal as many Western societies and our approach differs. But we have allowed some books, movies, performances and concerts even though a variety of different religious groups have found them objectionable.
In doing that, we assess the reaction of our community, whether there are immediate security issues or longer term security issues, by building in deeper fault lines, or whether we think that even though they are unhappy, this is not going to contribute to deepening of fault lines.
So, reaction of the community itself is part of the mix in assessing the security issues, as I have explained earlier.
If you look at our approach to foreign preachers, in 2017, MOM, in consultation with MHA, rejected the applications of two foreign Christian preachers to speak in Singapore. One of them had described Allah as "a false god" and various other things. The other spoke about "the evils of Islam and the malevolent nature of Islam" and more things.
We also banned two Muslim preachers. One is Mufti Menk, Zimbabwean Islamic preacher. With your permission, Sir, can the video be played?
: Yes, please. [
A video was shown to hon Members.
]
: Very charismatic and powerful but that is why we banned him. Segregational, divisive, he said "we should not greet someone else". So, we have HDB flats, we live next to each other. The Muslim does not greet the Christian and the Christian does not greet the Muslim. What happens to the Hindus as well?
The second video, again with your permission Sir, Dr Zakir Naik, can I let that be shown.
: Yes, please. [
A video was shown to hon Members.
]
: That was said in Indonesia just before the elections for the governor. We have banned him. He has also said Muslims should not take Jews and Christians as protectors or friends, otherwise they will become Jews or Christians. One is in Zimbabwe and the other is now, I think, is in Malaysia. Very eloquent.
Thankfully, Singaporeans take a different view. The 2019 IPS Study shows that 82% of our people believe that a religious leader should not be influencing people's votes in elections. Eight-two percent of Muslims in Singapore also believe that.
So, for foreign preachers, we disallow even if they may not say something offensive in Singapore. If they have been offensive elsewhere, their offensive teachings are available online, you allow them into Singapore, you then allow them to build up a following in Singapore. So, we do not allow them because eventually that can become seriously divisive – like not shaking hands, not greeting each other, not voting for candidates of another race or religion.
Sometimes, we will not know everything the preacher has said elsewhere. And sometimes, we have to make a judgement on the degree to which what he has said elsewhere is offensive.
Let me now turn to how we have dealt with preachers in Singapore.
In 2017, a preacher in a local mosque, Imam Nalla, recited a supplication that called for God to grant victory – some people said it is help –over Jews and Christians during Friday congregational prayers. This passage is not in the Quran. A video of his supplication went online. Imam Nalla was charged. He was fined of S$4,000. He was on Work Pass and was asked to leave Singapore.
Why did we take this step? I have explained it in Parliament. Charging a cleric is a serious step. On the other hand, I was concerned again about the normalising effect of such a sermon. If we allow an Imam to exhort victory against Christians, can we prevent Christian preachers from saying similar things about Muslims, or followers of other religions? Or taking some passages in the Old Testament out of context? What will then be the consequence if this becomes a regular occurrence in religious sermons of the different faiths? These things have a momentum, action and reaction. Let us say we have this on a regular basis. What do you think the atmosphere will be like in our common meeting places?
So, the Imam was charged. A line was drawn. He apologised to Christian leaders and the Rabbi of Singapore. To show that this was a matter of principle and that we accepted that the Imam meant no actual ill will or malice, I met him openly, in a mosque, after his conviction, had breakfast with him before he was asked to leave Singapore. But the principle was established.
In 2010, we had a Christian pastor, insulting, trivialising, ridiculing beliefs of Buddhists and Taoists, gentleman by the name of Rony Tan recorded on video and uploaded. ISD spoke with him. He apologised.
In 2010, another Christian pastor, Mark Ng, denigrating Taoist beliefs. Compared praying to Taoist deities to “seeking protection from secret society gangsters”. ISD spoke with him. He and his church apologised.
Mr Speaker, I repeat: this Government makes no apologies for its zero tolerance of bigotry.
Should the Government take a hands-off approach? Some people have argued: Singapore is secular. So, we should not be banning material that is offensive to Christians, offensive to others because we are a secular Government. Why are we intervening? Leave it to the people.
Let me respond by referring to the French example.
France has this ideology: the state will not intervene in religious matters because it is secular. They term it "Laicite"
.
French secularity means people can publish material that is offensive to any religion. If you look at Tab 8, you will see a series of cartoons published by Charlie Hebdo. You have cartoons on the Trinity, cartoons of the Pope holding a condom-like sacrament and various other cartoons.
Just give you a sense. When we talk about in broad terms about free speech, people do not really understand sometimes what they are talking about. These cartoons bring right down to the brass tacks what we are talking about and whether you think free speech should extend to this sort of speech.
The Catholics were deeply unhappy. They brought law suits. Terrorists did not sue. They used it as an excuse to attack Charlie Hebdo in the name of Islam. No excuse for what they did. After the Charlie Hebdo attack, Mr Bilahari Kausikan, our then Ambassador-at-Large, gave a speech. He said that the French state had hobbled itself by its own absolutist beliefs. He said the state should be able to stop such publications. The EU and French Ambassadors responded. They wrote to The Straits Times Forum pages. They said that Europe did impose some constraints against the abuse of freedom of speech, especially against anti-Semitic speech. Mr Bilahari responded and pointed out the double standards protect one group – the Jews – while standing by the vilification of another religion – Islam – in the name of free speech. In fact, one can add, in the vilification of the Catholic church as well.
Essentially, the French position is the right of anyone to vilify a religion is absolute. I think you can legitimately ask why should that right to publish override the right of a religious group not to have its texts, beliefs, practices, ridiculed? And what about obligations of citizens to preserve harmony, unity. Do citizens not have such obligations? And if free speech is really absolute, then why prevent anti-Semitic speech?
Should we adopt the same "secular" approach that France takes? Take a hands-off approach, allow these cartoons, and other offensive material, ridicule, hate speech directed at any race or religion?
This secular Government is completely neutral. It does not privilege any religious group, nor does it allow any religious group to be insulted and attacked. This secular Government guarantees freedom of religion. It protects all, including minorities, from threats, violence. It works closely with IROs, IRCCs, religious leaders to ensure a common understanding of what binds us as Singaporeans, that we all work towards religious harmony. That is the fundamental assurance one gets in Singapore.
Does not matter who you are, what religion you believe in, you are free to believe in any religion, including not to believe. You and members of your faith will be protected from hate speech, unacceptable offensive speech. The state will strive in every way possible to achieve racial, religious harmony.
That is the secularity we adopt. That is different from saying Government should take a hands-off approach, in the name of secularity, allow people to spread hate speech, promote violence.
The French approach is illustrative of another interesting point. It is guided by a dark history that the rest of Europe shares, specifically, the anti-Semitism which led to the Holocaust, and the complicity of almost all European countries in the persecution of Jews during WWII. Thus, in some European countries, it is an offence to even deny the Holocaust. These include Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Poland, Romania, Slovakia.
But really does one have to wait until a Holocaust type of nightmare, against a particular group, before you act against hate speech? Not for us to say the French or European approaches are right or wrong. Europe has a long tradition, a proud heritage. But our experience of nationhood and the value system of our respective cultural traditions convince us the European approach will not work for us.
Now, Europe is grappling with other issues: immigration, multiculturalism and anti-Semitism is again on the rise in Europe. Extreme right-wing populist movements, in some cases neo-fascist, are rising across Europe. Obviously, the liberal values of racial and religious tolerance are not shared by a fairly significant number of Europeans at this point in time.
Tolerance of hate speech does not breed tolerance of difference. We have to decide what works for us. Singapore is only 54 years old this year. Racial and religious tolerance is slowly being rejected in older societies than ours, which claim to be liberal. Prudent for us, not to take Singapore’s values, unique and new in history for granted.
You look at our history, fault lines. The 2016 CNA-IPS Survey on Race Relations – it is Tab 9 and it is also on the screen. Sixty-three percent of Malays, 62% of Indians and 72% of others thought there was a majority Chinese privilege. Even nearly 50% of Chinese thought there was such a privilege.
If you look at another table, on the same tab, 40% of minorities felt that the majority race was demanding for more rights. If you look at relevance of policies, thankfully, most of our citizens felt that our existing legislation, Racial Harmony Day, Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act, were very good things to have.
If you look at racism as a persisting concern, nearly half the respondents acknowledge the persistence of racism as a problem.
Even Chinese, when you ask about their friends, they say 42% are either mildly racist or racist.
Openness to race discussion – two-thirds felt that discussions on race was disconcerting because it could be offensive and lead to tension.
So, you can see we have done well but the fault lines remain and they run deep and they can be exploited. When two-thirds of Singaporeans believe that mere talking about racial issues causes tension, what do you think about offensive speech?
Studies have shown we react differently to people from different races. "The human brain fires differently, when dealing with people outside of one's own race," I am quoting a study on that.
We are more likely to trust those from the same race. And I quote, "Shutting our eyes to the complexities of race does not make them disappear, but does make it harder to see that colour blindness often creates more problems than it solves."
You look at the former Yugoslavia – Muslims, Christians lived side by side for nearly 500 years – and not just 54 years – substantially similar genetic make-up, shared history and Yugoslavia broke up: genocide and atrocities.
Let me now turn to the Christchurch shooting. It just suffered its worst ever mass shooting. Right-wing terrorist, acted out his hate-filled ideology wanted to create fear among the Muslim community in New Zealand. The response of the New Zealand Prime Minister and the people of New Zealand, have been quite amazing, and there is much for us to learn from them.
The Prime Minister embraced the Muslim community, showed that she sincerely shared in their pain and loss. And the people of New Zealand have displayed great strength and resilience. They have shown the world how to respond to a terrorist attack – not with hate, but with rejection of the message of the terrorist.
In Singapore, we have been building up the resilience of our citizens, through the SGSecure movement. We do not have the history that New Zealand does, and our population is much more diverse. Nevertheless, I can only hope that as a nation, we can respond in the same way, in the face of terror.
New Zealand has a relatively small Muslim population, compared to us. New Zealand police have, in recent years, taken steps to understand, and engage their Muslim community. They have even employed a number of our officers, for this purpose, including two Muslim officers from the Security Command who have relocated there.
Let me now turn to the Watain concert. The lyrics and the beliefs of the band denigrate Christianity. Seriously offensive. Their own fans acknowledge this. Natural therefore that Christians would take offence.
IMDA received the application from the organiser at the end of December 2018. MHA was then informed of the application. After considering: MHA initially told IMDA that MHA objected to the concert. IMDA then requested a reconsideration of MHA's position. IMDA also proposed its detailed licensing conditions and requirements for the concert for MHA's consideration.
The restrictions were quite substantive: the concert would be classified R18; removal of songs that may be potentially sensitive; no religious symbols used during the concert; no reference to religion in the band's on-stage dialogue; content should not denigrate any faith or promote any cult practices, nor advocate or promote violence in any way; no ritualistic or satanic acts; and a number of other conditions.
MHA then informed IMDA that while it was still concerned, it will leave it to IMDA to decide on issuing such a restricted licence. That restricted licence was issued on 5 March. On 7 March, MHA asked IMDA to consider cancelling the concert, that is, two days later, and IMDA cancelled the licence in view of MHA's serious concerns.
The initial assessment was that if the band did not perform offensively in Singapore, that should be acceptable. Two days before concert, MHA received reports of mainstream Christians being very concerned, offended. My officers met with Christian leaders, leaders of other religions. Our Members of Parliament gave feedback – both Christian and non-Christian Members of Parliament and many others.
Given that many Christians felt this was deeply offensive and denigrating, MHA advised IMDA to cancel. It was my decision that MHA should so advise IMDA. My officers and I take in account both the reaction of the Christian community, and as I explained earlier, it is not just the reaction of the community but the broader security implications of that reaction, both immediate and the medium and longer term consequences.
So, it was a judgement call. The band comes from a largely Christian country – 67% of the Swedes belong to the Church of Sweden. With the restrictions imposed, we assessed that the concert should be all right. Our assessment was, however, different from what actually transpired. So, when you make assessments, sometimes, the reality will turn out to be different.
Why were the Christians offended such that they did not want Watain to perform in Singapore under any condition? Because of what Watain stood for, its philosophy. And you need to understand a little bit about Watain.
The frontman of Watain, Erik Danielsson, has said this about his creation – I am not going to read it in detail. It is Tab 10 in your tabs and it will also be flashed on screen. But he said it is potential to attract fanatical people. He accepts. He says that they do promote lawlessness, violence, crime, madness, all hopefully for the love of the devil and the primal urge to express it. He says, "We are not talking about ethics and morals, we are talking where no laws exist, and no morals exist."
His views on Christians, "All our enemies are Christian sheep. We go about doing our thing, pissing in their living rooms". Music does have the potential to make people do bad things. He was asked whether he feared that he would be misunderstood and that someone might go and start shooting in a mall. And he said that, "That would not be a misunderstanding. I totally encourage any kind of terrorist acts committed in the name of Watain, absolutely. That is the way it works.”
The interviewer then repeated the question, just to be sure; and he doubled down, "We have always been encouraging music to take a physical form. When churches were burned, to me, it is the very natural consequences of being the devil's music. What matters is the effect this has, the effect of those church burnings had on the people who were terrible! They were f------- afraid, they were sh-tting in their pants, because, according to the media, there were a bunch of Satanists burning down churches and murdering people. It is like holding your hand, iron grip that takes hold around people's throats. That is what was important about church burnings, more important than any time than a church is set on fire."
And he said that, "That has never been a line that we have been afraid to cross."
You can read the quotes in detail. I have asked for the quotes to be circulated because there are people who said context is important and I agree. That is why I have set out the context, as provided by the band itself.
The band's lyrics are also denigrating and they are in Tab 11 – I am not going to go into them, but you can read them with the background of the philosophy motivating the lyrics. Then, Members may then ask, given all of this, why did we, in the first place, give permission for the band to perform?
As I said earlier, we thought that if we told them that they will not play any lyrics that are offensive to Christians and imposed other conditions, there are going to be about 200 people there, that would strike an appropriate balance.
But church leaders and others we spoke with, understood our rationale. They nevertheless felt that we should not allow this particular performance.
So, when we concluded that this was a mainstream view, widespread and assessed the consequent security issues, we decided that the concert had to be cancelled. Our assessment of public sentiment turned out to be correct, because a subsequent REACH survey showed that, first of all, that 60% were aware of the cancellation. Of those who were aware, 86% of Christians agreed with the cancellation. That I think will be natural. But 64% of all who had heard about the cancellation, Christian and non-Christian, also agreed with the cancellation. Twenty-eight percent thought that it should not have been cancelled.
Buddhists, Muslims: nearly 70% agreed. Free thinkers, less so: 44%.
I recognise some Singaporeans disagree with the Government. For example, Ms Chew Wei Shan, a former teacher. She set out her views quite articulately in a post. There were also others as well. Essentially, their point is the Government is being "self-righteous" in trying to govern other people's lives and decisions. Audience can listen to metal music without being influenced by a band's beliefs. NCCS and churches can advise their members not to go to the concert. No need for a ban.
Seen in isolation: these are valid points. The argument in essence is: why should I not listen to what I want to? Why should you, the Government, or the church, tell me what I can listen and what I cannot listen to?
The reality, however, as we have seen, is not so simple. The larger picture, it is not about whether the Government should tell you what music you can or cannot listen to.  You can listen to Watain concerts, for example, on Spotify, at least as of now. The issue here is about whether the Government should give Watain licence to perform publicly in Singapore. And the Government has a responsibility to not just the individuals who like the music, but also the majority of Singaporeans who would be offended. And it is not just one Watain concert. If we allowed this concern, we will have to allow other such concerts.
Then, what about other performance arts? What about drama? What about visual performances? We must allow similar hate and offensive speech, and I think if you see the lyrics and what they say, it goes well into the territory of hate speech. We must allow, on the principle of fairness.
Then, what about political, religious discourse? Logically, we should allow, based on the same reasoning. But assume for the time being, we can draw some line that says "no" to political and religious discourse but only in music and entertainment, you will still then have a lot hate speech in the mainstream through entertainment.
The question then would be: do you agree with the evidence, that hate speech, hate music, can cause deep splits, divisions within society, that it can normalise hateful sentiments, allow discrimination?
Would those people who are unhappy with the ban of Watain be willing to accept the following consequences of their position. Will they accept that over time the fault lines of race and religion will be greater? I have shown you the research. Do they accept that hate speech then would become normalised? And do they also accept the consequences of that? Then, they are being honest. If they say "yes", I accept all of these, I still think we should have absolute freedom of speech, we should have the freedom to have hate speech through entertainment in Singapore, regardless of the consequences.
If they are willing to say, "I accept that similar concerts entertainment attacking Islam, Buddhism and other religions should also be allowed." They have to say that. You cannot say, "I only accept it in respect of one religion."
And if we allowed Watain, do we also allow Malay Power music? Members will recall what I said earlier. These bands call for an end of immigration to Malaysia, and for non-Malays to be expelled from the country. And they say they draw their inspiration from Nazi Germany.
Because if we allowed Watain, what grounds would we have to ban other groups with similar messages? And then, do we allow Chinese Power music as well? Where do you draw the line? It does not exist now. But if Malay Power is allowed to thrive, you are sure we would not have Chinese Power music as well?
And why not go further? If we can allow Watain and their lyrics and their philosophy, should we now allow the kinds of cartoons that Charlie Hebdo has published? They were so repulsive that when we first want to distribute it, the Parliament Secretariat said this is too offensive to distribute in Parliament. And I said that is the very purpose to bring across to people reality, what it is that we are talking about.
Should we agree to the mass media reprinting the Danish cartoons?
Consider the Danish experience. In 2005, a Danish publication ran 12 editorial cartoons under the title "The Face of Muhammad". One depicted the Prophet with a bomb in his turban. Another showed him in heaven telling suicide bombers that heaven had run out of virgins. Ambassadors from Muslim countries petitioned the Danish government to condemn the cartoons and punish the responsible parties. The government said it had no right to interfere with the freedom of the press. A year later, the Danish and Norwegian embassies in Syria were set on fire. A mob burned down the Danish embassy in Lebanon.
What do you think will be the consequences if we allowed the same within Singapore? What do you think our Muslim population will think? Will it unite us or divide? What do you think will be the consequences for us within the region towards Singaporeans and Singapore?
I hope Members, when they speak, will not flinch from these questions and run into generalities on free speech. You got to ask, in brass tacks: What do you mean? What should be the restrictions? Should we restrict these things? Should we not? If we do not, are we prepared for the consequences?
If you honestly say "Yes, we accept all these possible consequences," that would be an honest statement. But if you put it in these terms and that you accept these consequences, you will be in a small minority. I do not think many Singaporeans will support such a position.
Let me explain by reference to some surveys again. In the 2013 IPS Survey, 95% of Malays said race was important to identity. This is in Tab 12 of the tabs. Eighty-five percent of Chinese and Indians said the same; 97% of Muslims said religion was important for identity; 91.4% of Christians said that and 89.5% of Catholics said the same. Eighty-five percent of the respondents said that a police report should be made when someone pokes fun at racial, religious groups; 87% of the respondents said a report should be made when someone insults another racial or religious group in a public setting; 86% of respondents said a report should be made when there is material criticising other religions or racial beliefs.
If you look at Tab 13, the latest IPS Survey which came out just a few days ago, 28 March 2019, talks about "Religion in Singapore: The Private and Public Spheres", 65% of Singaporeans identified themselves as "at last somewhat religious." Forty-two percent said they prayed at least once a day. That is a very high level of religiosity. It ranged from 31% to 77%. Eighty-seven percent of Muslims and Christians read religious scripts outside of a worship service.
Eighty-eight percent had at least some confidence in Parliament. I think that shows that the public generally believes in Parliament and the legislative process has generally been fair, certainly with respect to religion and race. Seventy-seven percent said religious extremists should not be allowed to hold public meetings to express their views. And 73% said religious extremists should not be allowed to publish their views online. But I should add that of the younger respondents, 45% of those between 18 and 25, were more open to such views being published online. That is another reason why we should have this discussion here and a broader discussion outside. I think the younger generation also needs to understand what is it that they are saying "Yes" to and what the consequences are.
Ninety-seven percent said that a religious leader should not make insensitive comments about another’s religion and 95% said a religious leader should not encourage his followers not to mix with members of another religion. And 88% thought a religious leader should not even point out flaws in another religion to the congregants even behind closed doors.
That is our society. It is religious, but Singaporeans believe in giving everyone their own religious space. They frown upon conflicts, do not approve of offensive religious speech and insults. They believe that the Police should act when there are insults or criticisms directed at another religion, let alone hate or offensive speech.
These views have been moulded by our own experiences and our understanding of why we have racial, religious harmony in Singapore. These findings show the support of Singaporeans for the approach we have taken so far.
Some commentators online have also said dark suggestions of a Christian conspiracy, they have a hold on Government; Government bowed to their power; over-representation of Christians in institutions of power. They try to turn it into a "Christians vs others" debate. I say these people are nasty, opportunistic and dangerous. I made the decision in my capacity as Minister for Home Affairs, enshrined with the responsibility of guarding national security and religious harmony. No one – Christian or otherwise – influenced me. I am not a Christian. I also decided to ban two Christian preachers in 2017. So, what does one make of that?
Mr Speaker, so long as a government believes in the principles that I have set out is in this House and such a government is in charge, no matter who the Minister for Home Affairs is – Christian, Muslim, Hindu or agnostic – that government would make such decisions on the basis of national interest.
Having initially made the decision to allow the concert, we had new information on how the community was reacting. What do you do? If we were only interested in tactical considerations, we would have let the concert proceed. But that is not the right thing to do. The right thing – more difficult to do – is to cancel and explain to the public why we cancelled it. But I should caution at the same time it is not possible for the Government to accept any community's viewpoint on all issues, on every performer, for every concert, in every art form. We will give due consideration to the views of all communities. But, ultimately, the Government will have to decide, based on the principles I have set out.
I have no doubt we will have to make many more such pragmatic decisions on concerts, books, materials which some will consider irreverent or even derogatory of religion. We cannot and would not ban everything, however slight the offence. But the Government will be fair, even-handed and has to be practical. But I reiterate – where hate speech is concerned, where offensive speech is concerned, where vast numbers of any community finds it deeply wounding, we will not hesitate to take action.
The REACH Survey that I cited earlier shows the majority agreed with Government’s cancellation of the Watain concert. But let ask ourselves: what if the majority did not feel that something deeply offensive to a minority community should be banned? Should we, therefore, allow such an event? The majority of Germans in the 1930s may not have objected to vile anti-semitism of the Nazis. But that does not mean the majority view was correct. I hope we would always have a Government that insists on doing the right thing to protect any community in Singapore, no matter how small, no matter what the majority might feel.
Let me now turn, finally, to the role of social media. The social media has fundamentally changed the complexion of public discourse. Hate speech and offensive speech travel much faster, gain wider audience than before.
I had earlier quoted a study in Germany. What was telling about that study is that when there were Internet outages or service disruptions to Facebook, incidence of anti-immigrant violence dipped in the very places where they were high. Social media platforms have shown themselves to be unable, unwilling to deal with hate and offensive speech. They have not taken real responsibility for the content circulating on their platforms. They earn money by advertising. The more eyeballs, the better. Using algorithms, they can deliver news reports that are likely to elicit outrage and responses.
I have put in Tab 14 some fairly offensive pictures. They are also on screen – white woman being violated by immigrants and someone is killing her child meanwhile. Twitter refused to take it down. Not in breach of Twitter's Hateful Conduct Policy.
In the case of the Christchurch shootings, Facebook failed to quickly shut down and remove the live-stream video from its platform. The video was viewed 4,000 times before it was taken down. But that is a small number, compared with the circulation on WhatsApp. And Facebook will tell you it cannot do anything about that because of encryption.
I think the Prime Minister of New Zealand did well when she called for social media companies to take responsibility for the contents they published. "It cannot be a case of all profits and no responsibility,” she said. The Australian Prime Minister has talked about imposing criminal charges on social media companies that are not responsible.
Mr Speaker, I drafted the speech before Mr Zuckerberg's latest statement. That, obviously, has to be studied carefully. Prior to the shootings in Christchurch, it was said that white racialist hate speech cannot be taken down, should not be taken down. In a few days, that position seems to have changed. We will need to deal with this.
The Bill that has been tabled on Deliberate Online Falsehoods is one step. We will have to consider what else.
Let me now conclude, Mr Speaker, Sir, by saying the following. Our approach to race and religion has largely been successful. The lived reality of Singaporeans is the test. In a Gallup World Poll in 2016, Singapore ranked top out of 140 countries for tolerance of ethnic minorities. In the 2016 CNA-IPS survey on race relations, which I referred to earlier, the respondents strongly endorsed issues relating to multiculturalism. Ninety-six percent agreed or strongly agreed with the statement “I have respect for people from all races”.
And President Obama said this in 2015 about Singapore. One of the reasons why Singapore has been so successful is because we "have been able to bring together people who may look different, but they all think of themselves as part of Singapore". He said, "That has to be a strength, not a weakness, but that requires leadership and a government being true to those principles".
I started this speech by referring to four events in four countries and asked if there might be a larger picture. What is the larger picture? If you look at Tab 15, my speech has attempted to sketch that picture. On the spectrum of race and religious relations, we are in the positive part of the spectrum because of the way we have structured our legal, social framework and all the things we have done to maintain racial, religious harmony.
What has been happening in Iraq and Syria is an illustration of what can happen when things go badly, not just in terms of race and religion, but also other things. They are in the deeply negative part of the spectrum. New Zealand represents a warning and alert to us that even a country which can fairly be described as heaven on earth can suffer a serious attack. It shows how hate speech can fuel crazy people. And what happened in New Zealand can happen elsewhere. So, New Zealand is positive on the spectrum, but uninhibited hate speech can have terrible consequences.
The Netherlands, Utrecht. Problems that extremism poses, even in advanced, prosperous societies, is shown up by that attack. Integration issues in Europe are a flashing amber light. And German Chancellor Angela Merkel has said: "The multicultural concept is a failure, an absolute failure." She was talking about Europe. We do not want that in Singapore. The former British Prime Minister David Cameron said: "We have failed to provide a vision of society to which [different cultures] feel that they want to belong. We have even tolerated these segregated communities behaving in a way that runs counter to our values."
For us, cancelling of Watain was one discrete step. Why we did that can only be understood by understanding the larger picture of why we are in the positive part of the spectrum. And that is why we are different from so many others.
Our current racial and religious harmony did not fall ready-made from the sky. It is not part of the "natural order" of things. There is nothing "natural" about it. We engineered this over many decades. People accuse us of "social engineering". "So what?" I ask.
We imposed ethnic quotas in housing to prevent racial enclaves in our housing estates and possible ghettoes – banlieus, as they are called in France. I am sure I am not pronouncing it right. We have GRCs to ensure minority representation in Parliament. Look around this House: could we have guaranteed this number of Malay and Indian Members if not for GRCs? We have the Presidential Council for Minority Rights which checks that Bills passed by Parliament do not discriminate against any racial or religious community.
We have protection of minorities written into the Constitution. We have the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act. Everybody knows in Singapore, we will have no hesitation arresting any bigot of whatever persuasion. Anyone who burns the Bible or Quran or any Holy Book in the name of freedom of speech, ISD will deal with him.
We long ago stopped Christian preachers from evangelising insensitively amongst Muslims. We have had a recent case in Clementi of an attempt to evangelise to Muslim boys and the Police are investigating.
We have the current harmony because we did all this. Not despite; but because. We took no chances. We brooked no agitation on race and religion. We refused to let the State bow to any religious or racial group, minority or majority.
In Singapore, we organise ourselves horizontally. All races and religions are treated equally on the same level. Most other countries in Asia, if not all, either explicitly or implicitly, organise themselves vertically on the basis of ethnic-religious hierarchy, including a liberal democracy like Japan.
Our uniqueness in this respect should not be under-estimated. Equality of races and religions is not the natural order of things. It has to be defended. On the very first day of our existence as a sovereign, independent State, the founding Prime Minister said, "This is not a Chinese nation, not a Malay nation, not an Indian nation."
From the beginning, the Government determined it will base its legitimacy by appealing to all Singaporeans, not just the majority Chinese. That determination to be multi-racial, multi-religious; that determination that no one will be squatted upon on account of his race or religion, the colour of his skin, or the language he speaks, that is why we became independent and we mean to keep it that way.
If anything, we are prepared to err on the side of caution and risk over-reacting to preserve harmony, rather than take chances and risk explosions. The late Mr Lee Kuan Yew, reflecting back in a New York Times interview, said in 2010, "I’ve got to tell the next generation, please do not take for granted what’s been built. I believe [our younger generation] has come to believe that this is a natural state of affairs… They think you can put it on auto-pilot. I know that this is never so."
Let us heed his warning. What we have in Singapore is precious, hard fought. But we are only 54 years old, a multi-racial meritocracy, unique, but the values are not yet so deeply embedded to be unassailable.
Mr Speaker, I invite Members to consider the questions I have raised and, just in case they have not taken them down, the list of questions is also in the tab, so that you can refer to it as you speak.
Sir, I beg to move, "That the Ministerial Statement on Restricting Hate Speech to Maintain Racial and Religious Harmony in Singapore be considered by Parliament." Thank you, Sir.
: Mr Christopher de Souza.
: Sir, this Ministerial Statement is timely. Inflammatory speech inciting senseless violence shrouds daily life with a veneer of danger – a heightened tension.
Last month, on 15 March, the news of shootings in mosques in New Zealand caught the world's attention. At least 50 people lost their lives to senseless violence. The rifles used to commit such violence were covered in white supremacist symbols.
Since February 2019, Christian communities in Nigeria have been attacked, allegedly by Fulani militia. They were shot and killed; their houses were set on fire; they were ambushed while trying to flee. In one day, more than 50 people lost their lives and 186 homes were destroyed.
In January, during Sunday mass, a Catholic cathedral in the Philippines was bombed – twice. The second bomb exploded while they were still responding to the first one. Over 100 were wounded and at least 20 were killed. The Islamic State of Iraq and Levant later claimed responsibility for the bombings.
Sometimes, the aggressive perpetrators claim that they are carrying out the violent attacks in the name of religion. Sometimes, the attacks are done in the name of white supremacy. Sometimes, there are other reasons, but just as no single group has always been the victims of such violence, the perpetrators of such senseless violence do not come from a single group.
The pools of blood in a bombed church are as red in colour as the pools of blood in a mosque that has suffered an attack. That common redness of the blood provides reason to argue that there are individuals from every group that suffer at the hands of senseless violence. No one group can be deemed the sole perpetrator; no one group can be deemed the victim. Rather, the perpetrators are vicious, slithering ideologies which propagate violence at all cost. They claim as their enemy the innocent.
Yet, the innocent are not helpless doormats. Far from it. Instead, the innocent can choose to fight back by deploying a code of rules governing the manner in which speech relating to race and religion is used. Such rules, which prevent the proliferation of speech inciting senseless violence against race or religion, have the powerful effect of preventing mindless violence-based ideologies from snowballing into physical attacks on society.
What this means is that this motion cannot only be about deterring phobia of any one race or religious group. Instead, it should be about deterring attacks on all innocent people, regardless of religion or race.
How? By deterring inflammatory speech. What type of inflammatory speech should we be deterring? Inflammatory speech inciting senseless violence against race and religion. Why? Because such senseless speech reeking of violent intent can propel people into injuring or killing the innocent.
That gunman in New Zealand had a skewed morality. But even if he thought what he did was right, such senseless violence does not advance his cause. Why? Because it attracts far more criticism than support. Why? Because a moral code which espouses hate and which propels people into senselessly killing the innocent is wrong. Such a moral code is not moral; it is immoral.
What we are doing today through this debate is building on principles that have already been embedded in our Singapore DNA. Indeed, Article 12 of our Constitution provides unique protection to race and religion within Singapore. Therefore, what we are doing in this motion is reinforcing time-tested principles to deal with the terror of the day. Essentially, we are debating about what kind of society we want in the future by building on the cornerstones of the past.
So, I am clear that we should deter inflammatory speech inciting violence against race or religion. However, what I do not wish for is for the definition of hate speech to be broadened such that even a differing view, expressed respectfully, becomes hate speech. For a robust and meaningful exchange of ideas, it must be possible to present a different view when this is done in a respectful manner. A respectful and reasoned differing view should not be considered hate speech. For example, during the Nazi regime in Germany, any opposition was quashed and severely punished. The student group called White Rose (die Weiße Rose) "published anti-Nazi leaflets, distributed posters ... in protest to Hitler's policies". Its leaders were sentenced to death. Another example. Helmuth Hübener, a 17-year-old, disseminated pamphlets countering the Nazi messages of victory in battle and also that the war was unjust. He was executed. In trying to rightly oppose Hitler and the atrocities that were being committed by the Nazi regime, many Germans, including Colonel Claus von Staffenberg, a decorated German army officer who opposed Nazism, were executed.
I dare say that none of us in this House would support Nazism in Singapore. But it is still especially important that there be sufficient clarity about what hate speech is because the term "hate speech" can be understood very differently by different people. This is also important because harmony is based on mutual trust and understanding. Building mutual trust and understanding may require the ability to express one's thoughts respectfully in the right setting so as to clear up any misunderstandings or misconceptions. That is one reason why we have Inter-racial and Religious Confidence Circles. Therefore, when someone presents a differing view in a respectful, logical and cogently reasoned manner, with evidence to back up their position, with an eye for the good of Singapore, that cannot be taken as hate speech. Therefore, in my view, the law as it currently stands ensures and codifies the correct standard. Hence, I support sections 8 and 9 of the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act and sections 298 and 298A of the Penal Code. These are some provisions that protect our racial and religious harmony.
Section 298 of the Penal Code was one of the criminal charges in question in
Public Prosecutor v Amos Yee Pang Sang
. Section 298 reads: "Whoever, with deliberate intention of wounding the religious or racial feelings of any person, utters any word or makes any sound in the hearing of that person, or makes any gesture in the sight of that person, or places any object in the sight of that person, shall be punished." The District Judge in that case found that Yee's "comments about Jesus, the central figure of Christianity, are clearly derogatory and offensive to Christians." On appeal to the High Court, the conviction was upheld and the judgment stated that the methodology in the language "has been to use coarse and hard-hitting words to arouse emotions", "using vulgarities and insults to deliberately provoke the reader and to draw him out, in the words mentioned in the charge".
It is also because of robust pieces of legislation, such as section 298 of the Penal Code, that I fully supported Minister Shanmugam's intervention in the Watain saga and the eventual banning of the Watain concert.
A strong argument can be mounted to suggest that the element of wounding religious feelings in section 298 of the Penal Code was engaged by Watain's lyrics in the distasteful songs of "On Horn's Impaled" and "From the Pulpits of Abomination", quite possibly contravening section 298.
Furthermore, a good and arguable case can be mounted that Watain would have also contravened section 298A(b) of the Penal Code because it may have "committed an act which the band knows is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between different religious or racial groups and which disturbs or is likely to disturb the public tranquility". The band has been very explicit that their music is the "Devil's music" and they even call their concerts "rituals" which they perform using so-called ritualistic props, such as pig's blood. After all, the "singer and frontman" of Watain has said, "whenever people take part of Watain, whether they like it or not, they are taking part of that place, a place with energies that are very real and that come into being if they are called upon".
As for "disturbing public tranquillity", that can be found in the interviews, saying that, "There would be no misunderstanding if their fans start shooting people." In an interview with Metal Blast at Bloodstock Open Air Festival in 2012, a member of the Band stated "I totally encourage any kind of terrorist acts committed in the name of Watain, absolutely... We’ve always been encouraging music to take a physical form, and that’s what happened in Norway in the early 1990s when churches were burned, and it happened many other times as well. To me it’s the very natural consequence ... in the end, being the devil's music."
Minister Shanmugam, thank you for stepping in and banning the Watain concert.
We must continue to have that conviction to do what is right, swiftly and effectively. Just as how MSF stepped in to ban the Ashley Madison extramarital dating portal to protect our family values and public morality, the Government was correct to cancel Watain’s performance.
Mr Speaker, Sir, I close with this story. A true story, arising out of the constituency I serve.
One day after the senseless massacre of the close to 50 Muslims at prayer in Christchurch, I received a WhatsApp message from the Chairman of Al-huda Mosque in Ulu Pandan. Haji Azman Kassim shared with me about how a New Zealander, Mrs Kim Forrester, turned up at the mosque that Saturday afternoon distraught and emotional. She was tearing. Within her, she felt the need to say sorry for the senseless massacre of the innocent people in Christchurch. Moved by her genuine emotion, the mosque-goers present relayed the information to Haji Azman who walked to the front of the mosque to meet her. He shared with her that he and the mosque community were deeply touched by her sincerity at which time Kim Forrester shared that the acts of senseless violence were not New Zealand, the acts did not reflect what New Zealand stood for and that she was sorry. With a warm heart Haji Azman said that he accepted her spontaneous sincerity but that she did not need to apologise. Instead, he shared that her act of sincerity builds harmony.
Picture that. A New Zealander, a lady, walking into a mosque, a day after the atrocious act. Why? Because we have something special in Singapore. She felt safe. She knew she would have an audience who would listen and not berate. A community who would welcome and not blame. And why did Haji Azman, a senior member of the mosque, so spontaneously walk out from behind his desk to meet her? Because he sensed sincerity and comradeship in grief. Who did the consoling? By a sweet twist of irony, it was Haji Azman. That for me is a picture of trust, and it occurred within an environment of trust, which is Singapore. We will all share Iftar during the fasting month at Haji Azman's invitation.
Sir, would Singapore have an environment of trust if we did not have robust provisions such as section 298 of the Penal Code? Would we have that environment of trust if we did not have organisations such as the Home Team and the ISD constantly tilling the soil to prevent fractious disharmony in our society? Would we have that environment of trust if we shied away from difficult debates and hard topics in Parliament? I don’t think so. It is because Singapore and Singaporeans are unafraid to fulfil those very duties, to carry out those very acts, that we have created an environment of trust and peace today – a constant work in progress. In that way Singapore is special, and it is one key reason why I support this Motion.
: Order. I propose to take a break now. I suspend the Sitting and will take the Chair at 4.40 pm.
Sitting accordingly suspended
at 4.17 pm until 4.40 pm.
Sitting resumed at 4.40 pm
: Mr Speaker, social harmony, racial and religious tolerance, robust but reasoned and respectful debate on contentious issues, all create an environment for modern societies to flourish and thrive. Hate speech, regardless who it is directed against – be it fellow citizens of different races and religions or against other communities and groups such as immigrants, those of a different ethnic origin, new citizens or even against those who proscribe to different life choices, do not profess a faith, or are of a different sexual orientation – ought to have no place in Singapore society, either now or in the future.
Hate speech per se tends to exist at one end of the spectrum as it usually hosts extreme prejudice or calls for actionable violence against individuals. The Christchurch terrorist attack on a mosque by a white supremacist exposes the dangers of hate speech that is directed at people of a particular faith with the perpetrator making his views known publicly before carrying out his gruesome act that was roundly condemned by all Singaporeans. The Workers' Party too condemns this cowardly attack. It is telling how significant our own biases and perceptions determine attitudes towards people who are different from us. A fair number of people I spoke to were surprised that more than 70% of all terrorist attacks are carried out by far right, non-Muslim and often white attackers, a fact Minister shared during his recent speech to the Religious Rehabilitation Group.
Apart from hate speech however is a potentially larger category of offensive speech, not quite a call to arms and as extreme, but expression which is deeply abhorrent, insensitive and completely unnecessary nonetheless. This category can potentially be made even larger depending on how quickly some of us get offended, making executive action open to politicisation. Given Singapore’s open economy and cosmopolitan society which is exposed to both Western and Eastern views, attitudes to what some regard as offensive speech can differ greatly amongst citizens and even those from the same religious group.
Most recently in 2017, MHA released a statement on offensive speech and expression involving race or religion. It set out the Government's position in managing issues and reiterated that Singapore’s approach to the matter sought to guarantee the safety, security and freedom of religion for all, with a view to create a common space for everyone. The annex to the MHA statement covered 14 incidents from 2005 to 2017 where the Government had to invoke the Sedition Act and Penal Code to deal with offensive speech, including the issuance of stern warnings and conditional warnings against various individuals. None of these interventions involved offensive speech in the performing arts or entertainment space. Unsurprisingly, however, 11 out of the 14 cases involved comments made online, on Facebook, on blogs or in online chatrooms.
Sir, my generation has grown up with the Internet being a large part of our lives. While the Internet has been an incredible platform in democratising information and has been a force for good in many aspects of our lives, from economics to entrepreneurship – the anonymity, immediacy, and ubiquitous nature of the Internet has also given extremists and those who revel in offensive speech a powerful podium. Combined with the political economy of social media revenue models and the unique heuristics of the Internet eco-system that highlights the sensational, hate speech is something all societies are affected by, with approaches to address it differing even amongst similar societies.
Going forward, Mr Speaker, and partly arising from the online space, my sense is that the Government and Singaporeans will have to come to terms with disagreement and contestation on a wide variety of issues because of the Internet. Many societies around the world are getting more religious with many groups more strident in their advocacy. Separately, a recent IPS survey observed that young people take a more permissive attitude to offensive speech – a fact which does not necessarily suggest that they approve of it, but they are prepared for a discussion on such issues.
In such a context, the balance between respecting individual views of a very diverse society like ours that hosts different mores, thresholds and tastes on the one hand and the importance of a fair and even-handed approach in governing a multiracial and multi-religious society on the other will become an important marker of a cohesive and united society. This cohesion and unity will be in danger if the Government is seen to be straying from its longstanding approach of strict secularism to preserve the common space that must be shared by all communities and individuals – a common space that must ensure minorities continue to deserve protection and should not be subject to mob justice. Our people will also have a critical role in adopting an even-handed attitude in living in a society that seeks to preserve the common space, and respect the fact that no one has a right to impose one’s beliefs on others.
The recent episode involving the black metal band Watain is a case in point. From public comments made by Minister and IMDA, there may be a conflation in the public mind of the regime MHA applies in deciding whether to approve or reject the entry of a religious preacher on the one hand, and the conditional approval by the IMDA of a black metal band, for example, which covers a genre of entertainment on the other. It would appear that different considerations should continue to apply in each respective case.
In the case of a preacher, it would appear that prior comments, particularly on inter-religious matters made by such a person would be relevant in deciding whether to grant such an individual entry into Singapore. Should a preacher have described those outside his faith or even within his faith in offensive terms, then a red flag ought to be raised as the Ministry has done in the past and the person prevented from entering Singapore for the purposes of addressing a congregation.
Unlike the assessment regime for entertainment however, it would not be reasonable or rational to impose conditions that require a preacher to avoid speaking about race or religion. If anything, promising not to disparage others faiths in Singapore but to be able to do so in other jurisdictions would make a mockery of the entire belief system of such an individual.
In the case of entertainment or a band, the Government appears to have a variated regime in place, one which does not hesitate to prohibit, correctly I would add, music that denigrates other religions, peoples or faiths. My understanding is that this has been imposed in the past for concerts involving even mainstream singers like Eric Clapton and other black metal bands.
By its own admission, IMDA's conditions in originally allowing Watain to perform in Singapore included the removal of songs which were religiously offensive, the band could not make references to religion or use religious symbols and that no ritualistic acts like the showering the audience in pig’s blood as had been done before in another jurisdiction, were to be performed on stage. Furthermore, given the band's history and concerns expressed by MHA, IMDA allowed the Watain concert with a rating of Restricted 18 (R18) and on the condition that it would be a very small concert with only a maximum of 200 people allowed to attend. It would also appear that IMDA and MHA's assessment included foreknowledge of Watain’s reputation, the use of anti-Christian lyrics and references to Satanism in some of their music.
On the surface of things, these conditions should have addressed concerns about race and religion since the application essentially involved an established genre of entertainment. I should also add that I was not aware opposition to Watain was prevalent amongst mainstream Christians until revealed by the Minister earlier. In rationalising its decision, IMDA stated in assessing and classifying content for arts performances and concerts, it aims to protect the young from unsuitable content, maintain community norms and values, and safeguard public interest, while enabling adults to make informed choices. Allowing adults to make informed choices is a clarion feature of a secular society that seeks to preserve the common space. It would appear that the original approach taken by IMDA correctly sought to carefully balance the competing and legitimate concerns of various segments of society.
Two days before the band’s slated performance, a widely publicised online petition made its rounds seeking to I quote "ban satanic music groups Watain and Soilwork from performing in Singapore." MHA thereafter requested IMDA to cancel the concert on the day of the scheduled performance and at the eleventh hour. Ironically, the cancellation arguably brought far more attention to the band and their music than it would have had the concert gone ahead. In fact, for a period of time on Spotify in the days following the ban, Watain had more listeners from Singapore compared to any other country in the world.
According to the IMDA's letter to The Straits Times Forum, the cancellation of the concert was due to new and serious concerns about public order, and ground reactions relating to social and religious harmony. Mr Speaker, I accept that new considerations can present themselves after approval is granted for performances and the Government is not out of place to revisit the issue.
Interestingly, in the comment section of the online petition against Watain, more than a few interventions alluded to why the Government was suddenly allowing black metal bands – many of which regularly host Satanic themes into Singapore. From an online search, it would appear that even local black metal bands have been part of our entertainment eco-system for many years now and foreign black metal bands have been allowed into Singapore previously.
For example, a band known as Mayhem are one of the founders of the Norwegian black metal scene from the 1980s, a forerunner of bands like Watain. They built on the extreme metal sound crafted by earlier groups like Venom, Slayer and Bathory. Their early years were filled with notoriety – their singer committed suicide with a gun to his head, and a picture of his corpse was used as an album cover and they were also tied to a string of church burnings in Norway. I do not think how many of us in this House are aware that Mayhem actually performed in Singapore in 2006. Deafheaven, a Grammy-nominated band, but derided by old metal heads as a "hipster" band also played in Singapore in 2014. To that end, how will the IMDA assess applications for black metal groups in future? Separately, which agency will compensate Watain’s promoters and what amount does the wasted expenditure come up to?
In conclusion, Mr Speaker, it is the secular basis of our state which also allows for selective interventions which allows the Government to accommodate totally different spiritual and moral beliefs hosted amongst different citizens. As the 1989 White Paper on the Maintenance of Religious Harmony iterated, while the Government should not be antagonistic to the religious beliefs of the population, it must remain neutral in its relations with the different religious groups, not favouring any of them in preference to the others. I would add that this expectation of neutrality should not only apply to religious groups but other civic groups and citizens in general in their dealings with the Government as well.
Overall, the Government’s careful and balanced approach to uphold a strictly secular society so as to preserve a common public space, and its principles towards religious harmony as enunciated in the 1989 White Paper on the Maintenance of Religious Harmony and separately the latest MHA's 2017 statement are sound and should be supported. But the Government must be careful not to be perceived as taking sides but instead err on the side of wisdom, especially on matters that are expressions of free speech, particularly in the entertainment and performing arts space. Instead of a hard policy such as bans, a graduated approach establishing a range of conditions like that done by IMDA in its original assessment of the Watain concert may better reflect the compromises required to create and sustain as accommodating and robust a common public space as possible.
To that end, effective laws and an activist bureaucracy are only one aspect of the solution. A robust education system which continues beyond school – one that enjoins Singaporeans to ascribe to an attitude of live and let live, respect for both the religious and non-religious, and dealing with fellow citizens with tolerance and mutual respect with the knowledge that we only have each other to lean on in good times and bad, are equally, or if not more important.
Ultimately, it is the Golden Rule – that we should not do unto others as we would not have done to us – that must be the dictum all Singaporeans, be it in the online or real world. References to the Golden Rule are found in all the Abrahamic faiths including Christianity and Islam, and separately in other faiths and belief systems such as Confucianism, Buddhism and Hinduism amongst many others. And even for those who are atheist or agnostic and do not follow any religion, such a moral principle – underpinned by mutual respect and tolerance – is one they, like all Singaporeans I would hazard, would generously support.
: Prof Lim Sun Sun.
: Hon Members of the House, allow me to walk you through a few simple steps. You take one racially charged social media post, add a sprinkling of likes and shares, then layer on a litany of toxic comments. Torch your volatile mixture with an algorithm that draws eyeballs and clicks. And there you have it – the simple formula for Manufacturing Hate 4.0. These are the everyday ingredients and steps for producing hate speech. How did these ingredients come so easily within the grasp of you and me? In short, information infrastructures.
The Minister has spoken today about the dangers of hate speech and its adverse impact on our social fabric. I will speak on how the digitalisation of our information infrastructures has made hate speech an increasingly lethal threat. One that demands a concerted response, both societally and individually.
Digital information infrastructures including social media such as Facebook, and participatory media such as Reddit, allow hate to propagate in innovative and insidious ways. I will highlight two issues of concern.
The first is an alarming practice termed as platform antagonism. This refers to the use of fake identities in social media platforms to discredit particular ethnic, cultural or religious groups. In a study by academics from IT University of Copenhagen, published in 2018 in the journal Critical Discourse Studies, Johan Farkas, Jannick Schou and Christina Neumayer studied fake Muslim pages on Facebook. These pages were purportedly by Muslim extremists living in Denmark who were plotting to rape and kill Danish citizens. They were apparently also agitating to dismantle institutional structures and transform Denmark through the imposition of sharia law.
By spreading such combative posts, images and videos, these fabricated pages quickly triggered thousands of user comments and shares. Although some readers questioned the veracity of these pages and reported them to Facebook, the majority continuously echoed the antagonistic discourse pitting Muslims against Danes. The anonymous page administrators were also careful to delete comments that suggested these pages could be fake.
Through this systematic construction of hostility between the two groups using visually arresting and emotive content, the page owners sought to normalise antagonism. They depicted these two groups as being fundamentally incompatible with each other, thereby sowing discord and legitimising discrimination.
Platform antagonism is thus a potent variant of online hate speech that is facilitated by our digital information infrastructures.
A second issue of concern is disguising racist and nationalist views as dark humour on participatory media. Participatory media include platforms such as Reddit, YouTube and Tumblr that allow for the uploading and sharing of user generated content. A study by Robert Topinka of the University of Sussex, published in 2018 in the journal New Media & Society, analysed user-generated images and posts based on the photograph of Alan Kurdi. This three-year-old boy became the tragic face of the Syrian refugee crisis of 2015 when his body was washed up on a Turkish beach. This poignant image of Kurdi would be repurposed and ridiculed in a community of interest within Reddit.
The specific subreddit r/ImGoingToHellForThis had over half a million subscribers and claims to mock political correctness in the interest of promoting free speech. Posts on this subreddit are patently and unabashedly racist and nationalist. In response to Kurdi's death, posts emerged that made light of his demise. Using macabre humour, they denigrated immigrants from the developing world and poked fun at refugees. In so doing, these posts used humour to mask what were fundamentally racist and nationalist views. Topinka, the author of the study, concluded that, I quote, “cloaks including humour and visual remediation can provide cover if not sanction for such discourses…[and] reproduce one of the most dominant and destructive political trends of our times".
I have spoken today about only two trends in our digital landscape that allow hate speech to run riot, but there are very many more. Emboldened by anonymity, fuelled by interactivity and powered by mass connectivity, online hate speech can sweep through communities swiftly and insidiously if left unchecked.
If I could ask the Members of the House to reflect on your not-so-distant youth, recall how you felt when you turned 30. I reckon that you saw it as a major milestone, a definitive step into adulthood. You felt sufficiently capable to make a difference in the world and mature enough to tackle life's challenges.
Mr Speaker, the World Wide Web is 30 this year. Is it the confident mature grown-up striding boldly into adult life? If the Christchurch shooting is anything to go by, I think not. A medium that enables a cold blooded killer to broadcast carnage by his own hand to millions of viewers is hardly mature.
Indeed, the inventor of the World Wide Web Sir Tim Berners Lee alluded to the fact that his creation is still in its awkward teen years. He declared that, I quote, "when you grow up, you have to accept responsibility, you have to realise that free speech is great but hate speech is not."
As it stands, today's information infrastructures make it difficult to contain hate speech. A fleeting like, a casual share, a throwaway comment – all these micro actions can come together in a digital patchwork to create a tapestry of hostility. Social media and participatory platforms have made it all too simple to produce and spread hate speech.
We cannot therefore surrender authority for our communication to technological infrastructures, even as hard-wired algorithms increasingly rob us of our agency. Instead, we must strive, individually and collectively, to restore humanity to our interpersonal interactions. To this end, there are two things each of us must do – exercise rationality and practise restraint.
First, in exercising rationality, we must confront our own biases and our inclinations to fall prey to them. Recognise that we can be easily swayed by sensationalist content that is emotive in nature. Resist the urge to confirm only our own beliefs and remain open to a healthy diversity of views.
Second, in practising restraint, remember that online, even though we cannot be seen and we cannot see others, that there are humans on the other side of the screen. Refrain from making baseless, inflammatory comments that disparage others. Above all, do not condone or share hate speech. Mr Speaker, in Chinese, please.
The terror attack at Christchurch tells us that the Internet, being a communication medium, presents certain problems. It can allow people harbouring hatred to freely produce and spread hate speech which is harmful to the society. Our society must act to change the online environment to prevent the harmful effects of hate speech and online falsehoods. As individuals, we must also exercise rationality and be careful when consuming online information and interacting with others online. Our individual efforts can help deter the widespread propagation of hate speech.
Mr Speaker, a great deal more must be done to overhaul our information infrastructures so that hate speech and online disinformation are minimised, if not obliterated. Incentive structures and revenue models must be recalibrated to make the online environment more positive and edifying. Until and unless such measures see the light of day, each of us must exercise rationality and restraint to prevent the rise of Manufacturing Hate 4.0.
: Mr Speaker, Sir, I express my support of the Government's current approach to restrict hate speech with a view to maintain racial and religious harmony in Singapore.
The hon Minister in his Statement outlined the findings of scientific neurological research on the impact of hate speech on humans. It accords with my own research on the matter. The objective of the speakers is to prey on the human psyche to divide our communities along racial and religious lines by and, as said by the hon Minister, displacing logic and reasoning through desensitising individuals to verbal aggression, in part because it normalises what is usually socially condemned behaviour.
Research also shows that there is no difference in the impact of hate speech as opposed to offensive speech. It only takes more time for humans to be similarly influenced with respect of offensive speech.
Against that backdrop, the first point I wish to make is that we must continue to "invest" heavily in ensuring that, as a country, we remain united so that such seeds introduced by hate and offensive speeches will not take root in our multi-racial and multi-religious community.
The reality is that in this modern era, it is difficult to prevent people from hearing or reading hate and offensive speeches. It is not as easy as turning off the radio.
Hate and offensive speeches as well as fake news assail us through so many platforms, many of which are from overseas. We need to work hard on "immunising" our people and strengthen our social defence against these speakers.
In this regard, I will, shortly, in my Tamil speech, highlight how easy it is for members of a race to feel alienated by playing on ethnic sentiments.
I will, thereafter, in my Malay speech, highlight how regular outreach efforts between members of different religious backgrounds, such as through joining hands to celebrate each other's cultural festivals and help the less fortunate irrespective of their race and religion, is singularly powerful to guard against anyone who tries to separate us along racial and religious lines through hate speech. Sir, in Tamil, please.
(
In Tamil
)
:
[
Please refer to
Vernacular Speech
.] In any society, we can find some people expressing their views to the extent of creating hatred against others. However, we have to be careful when such expressions go to the extent of instigating racial issues. Let me give an example.
Recently, a market operator issued a notice in Hindi instead of the Tamil Language. It went viral in the social media and many Tamils came to know about this incident and were angry. Such anger is understandable.
However, the problem got worse when some people in social media said that henceforth Hindi will be used to replace Tamil Language. They said that Hindi would become an official language.
These views are not true. Such hateful views evoke unnecessary and wrong emotions.
It was only after Minister Iswaran had explained about these false exchanges that many felt comforted.
Minister Iswaran had assured that Tamil Language is one of four official languages of Singapore. He also said that henceforth translations should be done in a responsible and careful manner.
After Singapore's independence, it was written in our Constitution that Tamil Language will be one of the official languages. Even then, the thought of another language replacing Tamil has risen.
Many arouse racial feelings and try to divide our society. We have to examine such incidents. We must courageously confront such efforts that try to divide our society.
People who are involved in hate speech seek to divide society along religious lines and try to create an "us" versus "them" situation. The objective is to create a perception that one group within a society is different and more important than the rest.
In this way, the group that feels that they are superior will be insensitive towards discrimination and, in fact, commit acts of violence towards others.
Knowing this, if the bonds within our society are strong and cannot be undone either along racial or religious lines, hate speakers will not succeed in their efforts.
Here, I would like to commend the efforts by religious leaders in Singapore who place importance on cooperation with their peers from other religions in order to show that we are a cohesive society and are united.
One example of such a religious leader in Bukit Batok is Dr Suhami Mustar, the Executive Chairman of Ar-Raudhah Mosque.
For the past few years, the mosque has been reaching out to disadvantaged families in Bukit Batok regardless of race or religion.
For instance, the mosque organises activities to entertain families in Bukit Batok during the celebration of various festivals, like Chinese New Year, Deepavali, Christmas as well as Hari Raya Puasa.
These celebrations are jointly organised with other religious organisations like the Catholic Church, the Taoist temple and the Hindu temple.
The recipient families, comprising community members from different races and religions, will naturally sense the close friendship between different races and religions.
It is not just that. In the spirit of brotherhood, these religious organisations also help one another.
For example, during the Hari Raya Haji prayers last year, two of our Taoist temple organisations built a tent at Bukit Batok Central for the benefit of around 1,000 Muslims so that they can perform their Hari Raya prayers led by an Ustaz from the Ar-Raudhah Mosque.
The congregants were able to perform their prayers properly and did not get wet despite the heavy rain at that time.
We are truly fortunate to have far-sighted religious leaders like Dr Suhami and his peers from the various religions in Bukit Batok.
We must continue to strengthen inter-racial and inter-religious relations so that hate speech, which can potentially divide our different races and religions, will not take root in our society in order to safeguard Singapore's cohesiveness and solidarity.
Sir, the next point I wish to make is that, having regard to the emerging trends, especially involving the social media, there is a basis to consider strengthening the current framework. On the phenomenon of weaponising social media, this has been dealt with in depth in the report of the Select Committee on Deliberate Online Falsehoods which made 22 recommendations, and I would not say more on this.
I do think, however, that there is a need to see how we can prevent or deprive any commercial entity or person from making money by being platforms or providing support for hate and offensive speeches that may create disaffection along racial and religious lines. We could consider adapting the provisions dealing with terrorism financing. This will make corporations and people think twice before deciding to support such hate and offensive speeches.
Next, I suggest a re-think on the decision to oust judicial review of Government action under the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act and the Internal Security Act to deal with hate speech incidents that affect the maintenance of racial and religious harmony.
In some quarters, there is a concern about the possibility for the wide-ranging powers vested with the executive arm of our Government to be abused in future. In fact, I received an e-mail from my resident expressing this point.
Judicial review by the judiciary, which is an independent branch of our Government, will provide an important assurance and signalling effect to people having such concerns. This does not mean that the judiciary will substitute its decision on the matter; the narrow focus of judicial review is to ascertain the legality, rationality and procedural propriety of the executive’s decision.
I shall now conclude. Last month, I attended an Officers Cadet Course Commissioning Parade at SAFTI MI. It was a proud moment for all gathered there; particularly the officer cadets and parents. I was delighted to see about 10 religious leaders standing side by side and offering prayers and blessings to the newly commissioned officers drawn from different races and religions. This has been a longstanding tradition of the SAF. The Chief of Navy, who was seated beside me, mentioned to me that each time a Navy vessel is launched, our religious leaders will be in attendance to offer prayers and blessings too.
Having enjoyed relative peace and security for so long, we may be tempted to take such things for granted. The reality is that in many parts of the world today, this is not at all common. The peace and security we enjoy is a direct result of the painstaking efforts of succeeding generations of our Government leaders, fully backed by fellow Singaporeans, to ensure that we preserve multiracial and religious harmony. In the words of the hon Minister, he said, "We took no chances."
Our unity and future as a nation will continue to depend in large part on how we manage race and religious issues. It is therefore of paramount importance that we continue to be vigilant and guard against the propagation of hate and offensive speeches that affect the maintenance of racial and religious harmony in Singapore.
: Mr Speaker, Singapore's approach to achieving and preserving social harmony is informed by both history and societal context.
In the early 1820s, when our immigrant forefathers first arrived in Singapore, they naturally formed enclaves based on where they came from or the language they spoke. The enclaves were further entrenched by our colonial rulers who divided Singapore into ethnic residential areas.
The years leading up to our independence in 1965 were fraught with many challenges that threatened to tear our society apart. The social bonds formed amongst the people were fragile; the slightest provocation or tension could incite violent conflict. Our students today are still taught about the painful lessons of the Maria Hertogh riots in 1950 and the 1964 Race Riots.
We managed to overcome those challenges. We nurtured a sense of community and belief in a common destiny, by choosing to build a nation based on justice and equality for all. A nation where you and I are co-equals as citizens. As the late Mr Lee Kuan Yew said, "Everybody will have his place: equal; language, culture, religion".
The strong community relations we enjoy today arose neither by accident nor by the laws of nature. We strove to enable every community to have its own space to practise its culture and customs. At the same time, we sought to maximise our common space so that Singaporeans can live, work and play side by side in mutual respect, sharing common experiences, and growing a sense of shared identity.
We have a nuanced approach towards racial and religious relations. Every Singaporean has the right and freedom to practise beliefs of choice, to enjoy past-times of choice, and to appreciate arts and culture of choice. But such a right cannot be an unfettered one. For a small country like Singapore, how we exercise this right should also consider the impact on our fellow Singaporeans. We live side by side with others of different races and religions, and in close proximity. Thus, every Singaporean has to be accommodating and practise give and take. This means giving up a bit of one’s own space and comfort for others, but in return, we can expect others to do the same for us.
In Singapore, our Constitution, laws and policies have been the traditional backstop against hate speech and incitement to violence. The Minister for Home Affairs has touched extensively on the rationale of our policies. But can we assume the absence of offensive speech or communal violence in our society means there is social harmony and cohesion? Mr Lee Kuan Yew once said, "No amount of troops would be able to stop the trouble if there was real hatred between the different communities. The decisive factor would be dependent upon the goodwill between neighbours".
Indeed, forging a united people needs more than just the absence of denigration and discrimination and more than law enforcement. For while law enforcement can arguably remove hatred, it cannot fill the void with respect and empathy. A strong cohesive society starts from tolerance, and over time, moves to accommodation. From accommodation, we progress to an appreciation of commonalities and differences. Finally, friendships built on goodwill, trust and confidence in one another will form and must form. It is a process that requires continued effort.
To this end, we have been expanding opportunities for Singaporeans to grow a deeper understanding of one another through honest dialogues, across a range of topics. For instance, Ask Me Anything (AMA) is a community-led series of conversations where different religious leaders take turns to clarify common misconceptions about their beliefs and practices, as well as engage on sensitive issues. AMA is one of the initiatives under MCCY's BRIDGE, or Broadening Religious and Racial Interaction through Dialogue and General Education, which provides safe spaces for such honest and open dialogues to take place. Over 200 people turned up at one recent session on Catholicism in December 2018 to learn more from members of the Catholic Archdiocese. I participated in one of the facilitated breakout groups, and witnessed how questions that seemed sensitive could be asked and discussed extensively but calmly in a supportive environment; allowing participants to clarify their doubts; get a better understanding about each other without imposing beliefs on one another; and developing trust through deeper understanding.
Beyond religious issues, MCCY’s Youth Conversations have allowed more than 8,000 youths to come together and share perspectives on issues of national importance such as social divides, vulnerable communities and environmental sustainability. In 2019, a panel will be formed to further engage youths. The aim is to articulate a youth vision for Singapore in 2025 and an SG Youth Action Plan, which will cover areas ranging from jobs and employment to mental health.
We will continue to support and expand these platforms and spaces where our citizens can engage one another candidly, discuss their perspectives, and if necessary, agree to disagree respectfully. We will also continue to learn from experiences and best practices internationally about promoting and preserving social harmony. We will be holding the International Conference on Cohesive Societies in June this year, where we will bring together policy-makers, community and religious leaders and academics from Singapore, from the region and the wider world to share experiences, discuss ideas and promote collaboration.
Our religious and community leaders continue to spend much time and attention reaching out regularly to one another to build mutual trust and understanding. This is not only through regular conversations, but also through informal activities such as the annual Harmony Games organised by members of the National Steering Committee on Racial and Religious Harmony. Our religious and community leaders have also showed solidarity in trying times. For instance, after the Lou Engle incident last year, the Christian and Muslim community came together and showed how our strong inter-religious bonds would not be weakened by insensitive remarks.
Second, we must continue to appreciate how our different cultures and religions make Singapore richer and more vibrant.
Our museums and heritage institutions foster deeper understanding of our diverse cultural heritage anchored on our shared history. We express our national pride in the rich diversity of our hawker culture in our ongoing UNESCO bid. Indeed, life would be worse off if our hawker centres all sold food of one single race, or if we could not sit together with friends of other races to eat our meals. Fortunately, we can have food from all races all at one hawker centre catering to different dietary requirements, and together with our friends and neighbours of different races and religions.
Our vibrant and diverse arts scene also helps promote understanding across communities, through works that reflect our multi-cultural identity, as well as works that introduce us to foreign cultures. Many arts productions, through their exploration of humanity and societal issues, also remind us of universal commonalities while recognising our differences. Whether you enjoy performances at the Esplanade’s Pesta Raya – Malay Festival of Arts, or appreciating art works at the National Gallery Singapore, the arts are a powerful platform to unify people of different backgrounds.
We should continue to celebrate one another’s festivals. Those organised by the People's Association (PA) and the Inter-Racial and -Religious Confidence Circles (IRCCs) provide opportunities for people of diverse backgrounds to come together and appreciate our different music, dances and much more.
Third, we need to continuously build and nurture strong bonds with one another. I am glad to note there are survey results showing that more people are having friends of different races. We need to keep at it.
Sports is an activity that brings people from all walks of life together. We will strive to provide children and youth with more opportunities to play with one another from a young age, through the ActiveSG Clubs and Academies.
We have also expanded participation in Outward Bound Singapore (OBS). Students from different schools and different backgrounds will have common experiences and bond by facing challenges together. We hope that through these experiences, people will form meaningful friendships with one another, regardless of race, language or religion.
At the same time, we will continue to encourage a more caring and giving community. We will provide more platforms for collaboration, volunteerism and giving. For instance, we are expanding the SG Cares Community Networks to better connect volunteers and other resources to areas of need.
To conclude, Singapore's social cohesion and harmony is fundamental to our survival, prosperity and identity. But more than that, it is a testament to how we have succeeded in making our diversity a strength. Our diversity is not a challenge or a weakness. Because of our different cultures, beliefs and practices, each of us is able to bring something special and make a unique contribution to the Singapore story. We have woven a beautiful tapestry from many different coloured strands and it is what defines us as Singaporeans – a key to our identity.
We have no illusions that our social harmony is fragile and precious, and we must strive constantly to protect and strengthen it. Ultimately, defeating hateful ignorance and building a cohesive society depends on all Singaporeans; not just the Government, but every one of us. Each and every one of us can and must contribute to building a more united Singapore, by reaching out, listening to one another, and building trust one encounter at a time. Our nation will then always be a home for all Singaporeans, bound by friendship and a common destiny. Mr Speaker, allow me to finish my speech in Mandarin, please.
Singapore's racial and religious harmony is fundamental to our survival and key to our economic prosperity. Mutual respect and tolerance between the various races and religions are already embedded in our national consciousness. Although there have been no racial conflicts in the past 50 years, the global rise of populism and religious extremism has allowed race and religion to be exploited to divide societies. Our community organisations must continue their efforts to maintain our social harmony.
In Singapore, while each community has its space, we must also expand the common space so that Singaporeans can live, work and play together with a spirit of inclusiveness and mutual respect. Through participation in shared activities and the building of shared experiences, people will understand and trust one another better. This contributes to strengthening our national identity.
Our Constitution and laws protect the interests of different communities, including the prohibition of hate speech and behaviour that incite violence. However, building social cohesion and a shared national identity cannot be achieved through legislation alone. Our goal is to move from simply preventing discrimination, towards a people united in hearts and minds. This is the process of moving from tolerance, accommodation and celebrating our diversity to mutual trust. It requires constant effort from both the Government and the people.
Singapore's long-term peace and stability require Singaporeans to reach out and listen to each other, communicate and build mutual trust, one encounter at a time. Singapore is a home for all of us, bound by friendship and a common destiny. Let us uphold the principle of safeguarding cultural and religious diversity, march towards the goal of a united nation regardless of race, language and religion and write a unique, exciting chapter of our Singapore Story.
: I support our Home Affairs Minister's Statement on "Restricting hate speech to maintain racial and religious harmony in Singapore" for two reasons.
One, anyone who cares for Singapore will appreciate and testify that racial and religious harmony is critical to our well-being and that it must be rigorously defended.
The second is this: my belief that unrestricted hate speech, especially if it turns viral, can quickly turn one racial or religious group against another and destroy the very social fabric that allows each race and religion to co-exist in harmony.
I wish to make a few points on the untenability of unrestricted freedom of speech, the adequacy of the current legal frameworks and also to seek clarifications over a few concerns I have.
On freedom of speech. Sir, there are some people who strongly believe that restricting any form of speech, no matter how hateful or destructive, is a curb on one's freedom of speech, one's rights. Proponents argue, "It is my right to say what I want to say. No one else should stop me and no one is even able to stop me for practical reasons." Sir, there are at least three objections against this argument.
Firstly, although freedom of speech is an important value, especially in a free democracy, free speech, however, is not the only important value in society. There are other values that we honour, such as the freedom of other persons to live without intimidation and harassment; such as racial and religious harmony; such as mutual respect; anti-bullying and treating other people with dignity. Freedom of speech is important but needs to be balanced against other values and interests of the rest of society.
Secondly, each of us is a member of a larger society. Rights carry responsibilities and freedom of speech ought to be exercised with due regard to those who occupy the same living space as us. Unrestricted free speech, especially hate speech, puts a risk to the order of society. I remember what my friend, management guru Dr Stephen Covey, who is the author of the bestseller "7 Habits of Highly Effective People" once said to me. He was talking about Singapore and the issues of freedom, order and discipline during one of his trips here many years ago and this is what Dr Covey said to me. He shared, "When I was younger, I yearned for freedom. As I grew older, I yearned for order." And then he said "Now that I am much older, I realised that order is freedom." Indeed, the order in Singapore gives us the freedom to practise our culture and faiths. Unrestricted hate speech threatens the very order that gives us the freedom to practise our ethnic culture and religious faiths.
Thirdly, even if restricting hate speech is not fully enforceable nor is proven to eradicate or reduce prejudices and discriminations, it is still important for society and Government to make a clear stand in principle against actions that can incite violence, hatred and bigotry.
For the above reasons, Sir, I support the proposition that hate speech should not be protected and ought to be restricted; and that unrestricted freedom of expression should not be supported.
Next, on adequacy of the current legal framework. When the Ministerial Statement was first proposed, some of my fellow Members and I had thought that there would be new pieces of legislation introduced to further restrict hate speech for the purpose of racial and religious harmony. I am glad to know that this is not so. I think the current legal framework standing on sections 298 and 298A of the Penal Code, the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act, and sections 3 and 4 of the Sedition Act are sufficient to deter offensive and hate speeches.
I believe it is important for the Minister to reiterate and to confirm that this Statement is merely to establish clarity of the current provisions and approach and that no one, no Singaporean, needs to be alarmed that there are additional measures or safeguards against hate and offensive speech that threatens our harmony here.
On Watain. Sir, I want to next touch on the Watain episode because I think it is relevant to future similar cases. When the objection to the initially approved Watain concert was first surfaced by members of the Christian community, there were at least, I think, four factors of consideration to just let the concert go ahead. One is the right of choice for people to choose; second is the freedom of expression; the third is, I guess, the reluctance of the State to be perceived as overly paternalistic and also the reality, the tactical reality, that the concert was already given the go-ahead by IMDA and cancellation would cause inconvenience to and displeasure of the organisers and the attendees. However, as more information was uncovered on the group, it became clear that revoking the concert licence to perform was a valid move and there are good reasons for this.
The track record of Watain and its nonchalance towards acts of terrorism and going beyond its onstage satanic rituals into the realm of lawlessness and criminal activity are, to say the least, very disturbing. The Watain leader's confirmation that he totally encourages, I quote, "any kind of terrorist acts committed in the name of Watain" runs counter to what SG Secure is trying to promote.
Also, the unapologetic and blatant anti-Christian views expressed on many occasions by the Watain's frontman calling all his enemies "Christian sheep who don't dare to confront their enemy" and his encouragement of church burning. They are, to me, highly alarming and offensive.
Even members of the Malay-Muslim community, including mosque leaders, have also expressed objections to the lyrics of the group and its derogatory views towards Christians and Jews. They, too, voiced their support for the cancellation, as confirmed in a recent Berita Harian report.
It is unfortunate that, in this instance, the Government's decision was reversed so close to the event date, just a couple of days, even when it affects a small group. For that, I think an apology is due to the Watain group and the affected concert goers. But for the Government to go ahead with the concert just because it was initially approved, after knowing what it now knows or uncovered, would have been a wrong decision. Sir, two wrongs do not make a right. I, therefore, support the Minister's decision to revoke permission for the Watain concert to carry on and I hope we have learnt valuable lessons from it in the areas of better due diligence and also earlier consultations with key stakeholder groups so that future episodes can be managed more effectively.
Lastly, on clarifications. I have some clarifications that I hope the Minister can address. First, on how the public will know or is educated on what constitutes acceptable, offensive and hate speech and, second, on how the Government is going to enforce the current framework to reach a healthy and not an unhealthy state of restraint.
Offensive speech in the grey zone. As the Minister has rightly pointed out, speech comes on a spectrum and does not fall into neat categories. Whilst it is easier to identify hate speech, offensive speech is not so. I agree with the Minister that an absolutist approach of the two extremes of either totally banning or totally allowing all forms of hate and offensive speech is not wise. But this leaves a grey zone which sits varying degrees of offensive speech. Whether action is taken against the speaker depends on, as Minister has shared, the degree of offensiveness of the words and the likely impact in terms of the platform of delivery, the occasion and the reach.
In this framework of "it depends" guided by "common sense", how can an understanding be achieved with the typical Singaporean, with the man in the street, so as not to cast any unnecessary fear or any unhealthy self-censorship in society?
Where does one, for example, draw the line in debating or discussing issues, such as abortion, infidelity, LGBT issues which, to some, are rooted in religious principles and, to other people, are just secular discords based on how liberal or how conservative one is?
Where is the line between public discourse and platforms, such as private WhatsApp group chats? Should Singaporeans be advised to err on the side of caution to avoid any potentially offensive speech that can stir racial and religious harmony that may just go viral? So, these are clarifications that need to be addressed.
Sir, there ought to be a more effective way of educating the public, from younger ones to older ones, on what is acceptable, what is hate and what is offensive speech so that we attain a healthy and not an unhealthy state of restraint in society.
Clarification on enforcement. If policy makers are serious about restricting hate and offensive speech to defend our racial and religious harmony that we so value, how does the Government plan to enforce this approach?
There ought to be a clearer and publicised process by which violations are reported, for instance, and decisions by the Government to be consulted with the relevant stakeholder groups, such as key religious and non-key religious groups or leaders.
In conclusion, Sir, I am all for restricting hate speech for the sake of racial and religious harmony in our beloved country. And just because an approach may be hard to implement does not mean that we cannot learn to implement it or apply it better. So, notwithstanding my request for clarifications, Sir, I totally and strongly support the Ministerial Statement.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, last week, IPS released an important survey on the role of religion in the public and private space. Of the 1,800 Singapore residents interviewed, one in four found it acceptable for religious extremists to publish their views on the Internet or social media. A significantly higher proportion of younger people found the publication of extreme views acceptable, with almost half of those surveyed aged 18 to 25 saying they would allow such publication.
This is similar to the feedback received from some younger members of the public who disagreed with the cancellation of the Watain concert. They raised questions about the Government’s moral authority to police music, performances and artistic content.
I can understand this sentiment. Aspiring to have the freedom to express what one feels, the liberty to read and enjoy what one feels like, is seen to be a hallmark of a free and democratic society.
There are also other aspects of freedom that I think are important. The freedom to decide on one’s choice of religion and to practice it, the freedom to not be discriminated against because you are of a different race or religion.
I am sure we agree that we want all of the above freedoms. But what happens when these two sets of freedom collide or are on a trajectory to collide?
Some may be skeptical about why these two sets of freedom can collide. They can. If one were to ridicule or taunt believers of another religion, he may feel he is entitled to his “freedom of speech”, but the recipient can feel that he is entitled to be offended. And what about the recipient’s freedom of not being discriminated against?
These are difficult issues and each party is entitled to their own opinions and their rights. If we leave them to engage in a public disagreement, this could result in an escalating crescendo of extreme views against each other. And what if this spills into real action in the real world? So, someone has to act. And oftentimes, this ends up being the Government enforcement agency’s responsibility. If the enforcement agency does not act, the parties may take matters into their own hands.
The Government’s overview on music, performances and art is based on classification ratings, tied to age-appropriateness and consideration for public sensitivity. The IMDA regulates this. Not the MHA.
MHA is principally focused on public order issues and with that the maintenance of racial and religious harmony as it can impact public order. So, why did MHA get involved in the ban on Watain? MHA does not look at music and artistic content. MHA took into consideration the lyrics, views espoused by the band, and whether this would be significantly disrespectful, in this case, to the mainstream Christian community. In other cases, it could touch significantly on the sensitivities of other groups in Singapore. So, on religious harmony grounds, MHA recommended that Watain not be allowed to perform in Singapore.
But I feel the whole episode provides a few learning points. Firstly, agencies need to explain to the public that they are not making a value judgement on the art form. In the ban on Watain, there is no value judgement on black metal music. The fact of the matter is that the MHA was principally concerned about the words and the message that were being put out by the band, and the feelings, in this case, from the mainstream Christian community. It was not a value judgement on the genre of music.
Secondly, agencies need to be seen to be acting even-handedly towards different racial and religious groups. Minister Shanmugan has shared that bans on religious preachers in the past have been imposed on religious preachers across different religions. This even–handed approach is a point that is important to various racial and religious groups and needs to be repeated often.
Thirdly, while a judgement call has to be made on whether music and performances harm racial and religious harmony, such judgement calls should take place as early as possible so as to minimise confusion to arts practitioners and misunderstanding from the public that the Government makes decisions based on pressure from religious groups. So, we should look at processes and see how we can avoid a repeat.
On hindsight, we are all omniscient and prescient. Enforcement agencies will always be the whipping boy because they have to make a judgement call. If there is no public disorder, they are deemed to have over-reacted. If there is public disorder, they are seen to be lacking in preparation. Government agencies get no bonus points for active intervention to create a harmonious society. And over time, a harmonious society is taken as a given.
But, really, is it? Are we saying that society can magically chug along, and as active individuals in our society, we do not impact the course our society takes? I cannot believe that, and I do not think our young people will agree either. We are actually making a stand, taking action every day, in the words we speak, in what we do and what we do not do. Our actions or lack thereof have consequences.
So, we need to ask ourselves: how do we want the tone and texture of discourse to be in our society? Do we want civility, respect, consideration in our general discourse and public expressions of speech? The trade-off may be some restraint and the inability to be "spontaneous". Or do we want absolute freedom and anything goes – potentially insults, taunts, offensive speech, in the name of freedom of expression? Should different lines be drawn just because it is on social media, or in arts and entertainment?
We need to strike a balance. On the one hand, we cannot have a free for all situation so that one can step all over another and expect the other not to react or retaliate. On the other hand, we also do not want a situation where civil and considered discourse on all matters related to religion, race, or a group’s values or orientation be avoided or tip-toed around so as to avoid any possibility of causing offence. In fact this debate we are having in this House, in a considered way, shows that such issues can and should be discussed. As long as we understand what we are trying to achieve, and how we can work together to achieve them.
In the words of the great American singer and song-writer Bob Dylan, who won the US Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2012 and the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2016, he once said, "A hero is someone who understands the responsibility that comes with his freedom." His songs gave a voice to his generation, mobilising them and motivating them. And he understood the balance that even artists have to strive to achieve.
As we aspire to greater freedoms, with the stability and prosperity our society affords us, let us also have a care for those who may be impacted by our decisions, impacted by our words, and also those who toil to safeguard what we have. Our pursuit for freedoms brings a lightness to our spirit, but let us not forget those who carry our burdens for us – anchoring our racial and religious harmony for the prosperity and stability of Singapore. Mr Speaker in Chinese, please.
At the recent terrorist attack in Christchurch, the gunman killed 51 Muslims who were praying in the mosque. They were all unarmed. According to the gunman, it is the online hate speech and contents that have incited his racial discrimination and violent behaviour towards the Muslims.
It is thus clear that we cannot underestimate the influence of speech and literature. Sometimes, speech and literature can lift one's spirit and give people courage. But sometimes, they can also give rise to hatred and violence. We have to be particularly wary about speech and literature that involves racial and religious discrimination. Because, race and religion is the basic identity of a person. If a person is discriminated or insulted because of his birth, background, skin colour, religion and faith, it is equal to questioning the legitimacy of his very existence. And this can easily trigger hatred and conflict between races and religions.
How do we handle these speeches and literature that involves racial and religious discrimination?
Fortunately, Singapore has, since the early days of its independence, established racial and religious harmony as the pillar of our society, based on our own experience, lessons drawn from other countries and the understanding of the human nature. Our laws strictly forbid words and actions that instigate racial and religious enmity.
However, besides laws, I think the more important question is that whether each and every Singaporean has got enough sensitivity towards racial and religious discrimination. Can we practise what we believe in our daily lives to fulfil our commitment to social harmony, and strike a balance between personal freedom and the freedom of others?
Some may ask, I am not a terrorist, I just want to listen to some music and watch some videos. Some contents may contain racial and religious discrimination, but I can discern good from bad, I will not become terrorist. Can the Government have some confidence in me and not interfere with my freedom?
To this question, what I will say is this: When racial and religious discrimination creeps into the public view through various media, you may not be hurt, but the dignity of some other people may have already been hurt.
This is like someone insulting and bullying you, then putting a video of his action on the web, how will you feel?
Do not do unto others what you will not want others to do to you. We all hope that we live in a caring and courteous society, not one that is full of hatred and conflict.
Racial discrimination and religious discrimination, be it in the form of words or actions, may not have hurt you but it may have hurt other Singaporeans. When we see such words or actions, we should not remain an indifferent bystander, we should step forward, express our position and stop them.
As members of the Chinese community, if we do not step forward and stand up for our Christian or Muslim friends today, we may be the one who would be hurt tomorrow.
If you look at tragedies that have happened at our neighbouring countries, you will know that ethnic genocide may not be very far from us. For example, in 1998, during Indonesia’s Black May riot which targeted the Chinese community, there were almost 1,000 Chinese killed and nearly 500 Chinese women raped in Jakarta alone. During the 1965 ethnic cleansing in Indonesia, about 50,000 Chinese were slaughtered.
As a Singaporean, I would like to thank the Pioneer Generation for creating a harmonious environment. Racial and religious harmony need our continuous effort to maintain. Although Singapore may look peaceful now, it does not mean that we can lower our guard and be indifferent to it. When one of us steps forward to defend our social harmony, we should support him, and be grateful for his courage and sense of responsibility.
As a mother, I hope that Singapore has a peaceful future. I also hope that the younger generation of Singaporeans will work together with me to create a beautiful world without racial discrimination, religious discrimination, hatred or violence for our next generation.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, let me first start by saying it is clear we must manage hate speech and curb messages that can damage our social fabric. The multicultural diversity in Singapore is something precious we need to protect. Music that promotes hate against one group and potentially divide social need to be tightly regulated.
I have three points to make. One, as someone leading an arts company that presents concerts here and overseas, I would like to make a suggestion that the agencies responsible for licensing content coordinate better. Decisions made must be communicated earlier, so show organisers can make the necessary plans without incurring unnecessary expenses. Last minute changes of decisions are also not ideal, and should be kept to a minimum.
Two, while we make sure that we regulate hate speech and protect our social fabric, we also need to make sure that we do not end up reducing the space for creative expression and imagination. Creative expression does need space to flourish and a willingness to challenge boundaries. While we must be responsible for what we say or do in the public arena, we also need to understand creative expressions often should not be taken literally.
Three, as society matures and the populace becomes more educated, I hope the Government can continue to focus on helping citizens make informed decisions and appreciating the diversity of creative expressions. In the sphere of arts, culture and entertainment, there will always be a diversity of world views and values represented.
I trust my fellow citizens. I am sure Singaporeans want to keep the diversity of choices they now have even as we shield the vulnerable and the young from hateful and divisive messages. In Mandarin, please.
Making Arts and Culture for Harmony. Singapore's racial harmony did not come easy. Cultural diversity is our valuable spiritual wealth. A Zaobao report on 24 March 2019 pointed out aptly that "by seeking agreement while shelving differences, Singapore uses the advantage of a multi-cultural society to draw on each other's strength and build resilience among its citizens, so that it can face challenges brought about by an increasingly polarised world, with confidence."
Arts and culture play an important role in social cohesion by allowing communities of different race, background, religion and language to have a common space to continue, combine and create valuable works based on their ethnic culture. Different ethnic groups have different cultural identities; we must first respect and understand each other before we can reach consensus in values. Hence, I have three points to make in this area:
First, I hope that Government Ministries and public agencies can coordinate and communicate better. Before performance licenses are granted, agencies must do in-depth studies and consult professional opinions. Agencies should also conduct more dialogues to understand from the organiser the content and nature of the performance. We must work together to avoid last minute cancellation because this will lead to mistrust in the relevant agency and people will question its authority. I hope the relevant agencies can make it clear what is allowed and what is prohibited, so that more arts companies can have a better understanding and take proactive measures when planning their future performances.
Second, we need more space for creative expression and challenge the boundaries so that arts can flourish and sublime. To create unique and forward-looking works in a multi-cultural society, we must think about and work towards tapping on our strength of "harmony in diversity" and endearing arts to the public.
Third, as society matures and the populace becomes more educated, I hope the government can increase the communication and be more transparent when making sensitive decisions, so that people can have a deeper understanding. Hold dialogues if necessary. I hope the Government can realise that art performances and production need a wider space for imagination to fully represent the essence and diversity of their content.
Arts groups and artistes must build a high level of cultural confidence, cultural awareness and cultural responsibility, with the prerequisite of ensuring national harmony and safety. Arts and culture can be a centripetal force, allowing people from the different ethnic communities to work together to build a uniquely Singapore multicultural society so that Singapore can become an endearing and liveable home for everyone!
:
Artistes and arts groups can make arts as an integral part of everyone's everyday life. Bringing together people of different races, religions, and backgrounds, and creating a shared understanding across our various communities. As we say, "We cannot touch music, but music can touch you." I hope the artistic expression and imagination created by our artistes and arts groups can bring people together as a nation, uplifting our spirits.
: Mr Saktiandi Supaat.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, may I start in Malay, please.
This is, indeed, an opportune time to discuss the issue of preserving racial and religious harmony in Singapore. As a Malay/Muslim and a minority in Singapore, I hope that my sharing can help to further contribute to and strengthen the harmony that we enjoy in Singapore.
Hate speech or offensive speech occurring elsewhere will have a significant impact on us in Singapore. Hate ideology which led to vile irresponsible action hit close to home in my ward recently. The recent attack on two mosques in Christchurch ‒ this event may seem distant but, indeed, I was shocked when I found out it was not that distant after all. It has impacted a Malay/Muslim resident in my constituency and her family.
I visited her recently at her rental flat to offer my condolences and show of support to her family.
She had just returned from New Zealand and shared stories, with her eyes full of tears and on the verge of crying, about her late eldest grandson, the late Tariq Rashid Omar, who was one of the victims in the New Zealand terror attack. Madam Zawiah Bte Mohd Tahir, 69 years old, is a Merdeka Generation lady with four children. Her eldest son, Rashid, a Singaporean, and his New Zealander wife had four children, and one of them was the late Tariq.
Upon entering her flat, she immediately showed photographs of her son and Tariq playing football and when he was a young boy. Madam Zawiah fondly recalled that Tariq used to collect “batu-batu” or stones when he was young, just like what Mdm Zawiah used to do at that age. She mentioned that this could be why she was not surprised when she learned that Tariq wanted to become a geologist and had graduated in geology in New Zealand. She shared that Tariq was a gentle, caring and devout young man, a talented soccer player who coached a junior team and had immense potential with a bright future ahead of him.
He was trying to help others during the incident at the mosque and was shot. On the day Madam Zawiah heard the shocking news, she was panic-stricken. Her only thought was to check whether she had enough savings to purchase a flight ticket to New Zealand to be with her eldest son’s family and, despite not being fluent in English, she flew there alone.
Some of our non-Muslim and Chinese business community members and volunteers in Toa Payoh East-Novena banded together to help her in any way possible, including assisting her with the costs of the urgent flight.
The late Tariq was one of many innocent lives lost among the 50 who died in Christchurch. But I feel reassured and optimistic that, even in Toa Payoh East-Novena, our community is aware of the deadly effects of hate speech on one of our own and have offered help.
So, here in the comforts of Singapore, we, too, are not immune if hate speech on different groups or segments of community proliferate globally. We have family members, Singaporeans of different religions and races travelling widely and living abroad for work as well. Here in Singapore, the social media and our openness allow us to be exposed to a myriad of information. What is important is that we exercise caution and adopt a firm stand against hate speech directed at any group or segments of society in Singapore.
:
My resident's story and the loss of her eldest grandchild, is just one example but I hope it should raise awareness about how hate speech could have adverse consequences for anyone when we least expect it. Indeed we have many policies and laws in place to root out behaviours and factors that threaten social harmony such as the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act and Penal Code sections 298, 298A, 267C and 505, and also the Sedition Act. We are lauded as the model of social harmony. But let me state upfront that we should not allow offensive and hate speech to allow to normalise in Singapore. That is within our control. What happens in other countries is beyond our control.
In his Statement, the Minister posed a few questions to the House. I wish to state my views earlier on in my speech.
I fully agree with the Minister and the facts and studies he shared that addressing hate speech targeting ethnic religious communities via logic and reasoning is likely to be ineffective. Normalising it and allowing it to proliferate is dangerous.
I also agree with the Minister that restrictions on offensive speech even when it is not strictly speaking hate speech needs to be applied judiciously and I still think Singapore's current approach in dealing with offensive speech – via the assessment of words and the material and its likely impact on the targeted community is a middle ground approach to take – relative to a blanket ban on all offensive speech and material.
I believe the Government has been impartial, fair and just in applying decisions thus far, but I think we can improve on making sure the neutrality of the Government in such decisions remains strong and unwavering. The Minister has highlighted clearly that government neutrality is key and the perception of it even more. How can we ensure that neutrality remains so when future decisions are made? Can we have a council of sorts akin to the Presidential Council of Minority and Religious Rights to advise the deciding Minister on matters relating to hate and offensive speech so that the neutrality element remains guarded? It could help alleviate issues of conflict of interest if in the future the deciding Minister is of a particular religion or race impacted by the offensive or hate speech or ideology, in particular for future Governments.
In addition, hate speech and offensive speech applies to various segments, races and religions on either side of the spectrum, for example, the rise in Islamophobia globally and the risks it poses to the Muslim community. I am sure MHA has looked into this and while the financial cost burden may be there, I feel it is necessary to reiterate that additional resources must be added to our security intelligence departments to look at terrorist threats from both sides of the spectrum as well as rising Islamophobia, so that internally we have a balanced view of the threats that may hit any Singaporean, regardless of race, language or religion and take pre-emptive action if needed.
But on top of all these, what more can we do? We must never be complacent and we should embrace ideas that help to mitigate the dangers of normalisation of hate speech. We are well connected to the world. We have a high number of citizens who have Internet access and are avid consumers of foreign news and social media content.
I would like to elaborate briefly on two points. One is how we can build resilience in our future generation to identify offensive and hate speech and reject such efforts. Second, how we as a nation, can take efforts at all levels to reduce the risk of perpetuating stereotypes of segments by race or religion which can be used as fuel or seeds for hate and offensive speech.
Mr Speaker, it is troubling to note from the Institute of Policy Studies' poll recently released, or study that was recently released, which said that although more than 97% of respondents said religious leaders should not incite violence or hatred against other religions, 26.8% of respondents were open to religious extremists posting their views on social media. Why do our young have such views? Many of them, according to IPS study, are aged 18 to 25 years who indicated they would allow such views to be espoused as long as these do not instigate harm on others. Did we miss a step in our outreach to our young to educate them on the dangers of exposure to such hate posts?
My earlier story with regard to my resident highlighted the dangers, the deadly dangers, of hate speech, and it kills.
So, I hope we would initiate an inter-ministry approach, involving MHA, MCCY, MOE and MCI to look into this. I read about a school in Brazil where students are taught how to identify fake news. Maybe we can apply a similar approach in our schools and tertiary institutions and use such skills to identify hate or offensive speech so that it does not get normalised easily here.
Next, the threat of terrorism from all races and religion is a practical reason for all Singaporeans to take Islamophobia, for example, and all forms of racial and religious discrimination seriously.
We would be looking at Singapore through rose-tinted glasses if we truly believe there is no racial discrimination in Singapore, or that it is so insignificant that we do not have to worry. This absolutely necessitates the conversations we are having here. It is not uncommon to find discriminatory comments often based off negative stereotypes left on discussion platforms on social media. These comments are not malicious to be prosecuted under our legal framework, but they demonstrate a lack of understanding and unfair generalisation towards specific races or religions. Because we have the MHRA and relevant Penal Code sections, these comments are already largely self-censored, so imagine what hateful words would transpire if we did not have the Act in place.
However, to minimise discrimination and pursue social harmony, we must go beyond restricting hate speech. The Government should expand efforts to encourage racial harmony beyond school, to the workplace, as well as working with the community. Maybe more can be done to encourage even more Singaporeans of various races and religion to have friends from other races and most importantly for sharing more stories of bonds and trust between races more prevalently, in order to build up the trust premium among the different races and religion.
The risk of perpetuating of stereotypes is another issue that we should address as it can be fuel or ingredient for hate speech and ideology.
If we perpetuate stereotypes, parents for example can pass on this mistrust and stereotypes to their children, and the cycle carries on generation after generation. The mistrust and stereotyping will remain entrenched, never going away, unless we nip the problem in the bud and change these mindsets and perceptions. As such, I would like to suggest that young parents be exposed to programmes that will promote opportunities for them to mingle with people from all races and religion, and to experience their culture. We have done all these. Maybe these can be done even more at the grassroots level through sports and interest groups, for example, as mentioned by Minister Grace Fu earlier. In TEN, for example, we have cycling enthusiasts group made up of young professionals of various races and sports could be a good example to form bonds. We are trying to encourage more young parents to join these activities. Through these programmes it is hoped that they will develop positive perceptions about their fellow Singaporeans regardless of race, and hope they would guide their own children with love, not discrimination or hate. If, from stereotyping, distrust, mischief and misguidance among some people build up, then with the prevalence of hate speech and hate messages, the cracks can turn into chasms. And once this happens, what is not normal becomes the norm.
I note that with the help of the IRCC, some religious organisations of different faiths have collaborated to implement volunteer programmes, such as the blood donation drive by Masjid Khalid and Heart of God Church. I hope that such collaborations will be encouraged, as charity is an excellent platform to put volunteers and beneficiaries on the same page.
I would thus suggest that to create more opportunities for interaction. We can look into say a Buddhist volunteer who usually volunteers for the temple's charity programmes could work with Muslim volunteers at a mosque to distribute food to the needy or perform ushering duties, for example. Hindu volunteers could put together a performance to entertain elderly beneficiaries of a Buddhist temple. This is in line with the national goal of encouraging Singaporeans to be more involved in volunteer work. Religious institutions, with their large networks of beneficiaries and NGOs, are good places to start, if they open themselves to accepting volunteers of any religion.
We cannot restrict hate speech beyond the shores of Singapore, but we can de-normalise it at home, by making it not cool, by speaking out against it. As long as it is something that seeks to glorify hate speech, it must not be allowed in Singapore. This is not because Singaporeans are immature and easily swayed by hate speech, no. It is about sending a very clear message and taking a firm stand against something that threatens our social fabric. Can we do more to help others understand why certain acts or words are so offensive, that it is not a matter of being small-minded or intolerant? I wonder if we can tap on local celebrities and influencers or even more to help engage the youths and spread the message? Can we also work with our corporate partners and labour unions to educate our employers and employees to reduce efforts to perpetuate stereotypes or build whistle-blowing policy on discrimination and actions that stereotype certain segments.
On a final note, the Internet has become a toxic waste dump for hate and malice, and any news story can pretty much be manipulated to divide people, not to mention perpetuate stereotypes too. The Internet promotes a sheep-mentality that turns people into raging mobs without obtaining a full understanding of the situation. In Singapore, children as young as eight years old have access to the Internet. This is a crucial matter that we have to pay attention to. I look forward to the strengthening of our laws to rein in those who spread hate speech via Internet platforms and social media.
I would like to thank Minister Shanmugam once again for the debate and his decisive actions taken recently as well as the clear point by point explanation to explain how Singapore deals with hate speech and why it needs to be unique to our context. I hope Singapore will continue to walk the tight-rope with good balance, to preserve the peace and harmony that we enjoy. This is a never-ending goal that our leaders, religious groups, all Singaporeans must continuously strive for.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I support the current measures to curb hate speech, but I think more can be done to support it for future generations.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, I rise in support of the Motion on restricting hate speech to maintain our racial and religious harmony.
Everyone believes in the importance of racial and religious harmony but what happens when hate speech and offensive speech take place? In this age of high interconnectivity, such negative expressions through messaging, music, writing and art can travel the globe at the speed of light. The mask of anonymity and the camouflage of encryption further aid the proliferation of hate speech.
A body of research and our own experiences had shown us that it is easier to pick up bad behaviour than good. Thus, we need holistic measures to prevent a downward spiral of hate speech begetting more retaliating hate speech.
History teaches us that in all communities and countries, racial and religious harmony is fragile. Hence, it is important that we nip any threats in the bud as early as possible. We cannot afford the escalation of toxic communication nor the contagion of acrimony. Hate speech should not be tolerated and those who propagate it must be made to face consequences, including punishment to serve as deterrent.
To borrow medical terminology, we need to build our herd or group immunity against hate speech through the vaccine of public education and of building trust among communities to overcome ignorance and misinformation. The greater the number of Singaporeans and residents who resist and call out hate and offensive speech, the more protection we have as a nation. Sir, in Mandarin.
To borrow a medical terminology, we need to build our collective immunity against the hate speech through the vaccine of building trust among communities to overcome ignorance and misinformation. The greater the number of Singaporeans and residents who resist and call out hate and offensive speech, the more protection we have as a nation.
We also need to strengthen our capabilities in dealing with three groups of people.
The first group is those who feel targeted but who may keep silent, bearing grudges. Subsequently, when the occurrences of hate speech become more frequent, some in this group may lose control and turn violent to hurt those they perceive as perpetrators. How can we identify the silent sufferers who may blow up and calm these "victims" before they make outbursts?
The second group is those who speak up. However, if they do not communicate in a constructive way, they may actually cause more harm and contribute to a more explosive situation. How can we help them to express and register their objections to hate speech which target them, but in ways which will not exacerbate the problem?
The third group is those traumatised by hate speech and related incidents. What happens overseas may also affect us. How do we help our people who have been traumatised by such incidents overseas?
Finally, we need to counter the propagators of hate speech by showing them in their true light. They incite hatred and even encourage criminal acts and terrorism. The music group, Watain, is one such example. Their hypocrisy and inconsistency between what they advocate and what they do should be highlighted. Even as the group encourages hate speech and urges the destruction of harmonious and constructive communities, its members continue to enjoy the convenience and even luxuries of the products of peace. These include the infrastructure and the services of people from different races and religions working hard to provide them with clean water, safe food, reliable travel and electricity which make their concerts possible. People who advocate hatred, chaos and destruction cannot have it both ways.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, racial and religious harmony is integral to the survival and prosperity of our nation. We must protect and nurture this precious but delicate asset to the best of our ability. We should never take it for granted but seek, instead, to constantly fortify and strengthen it.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, I support the Ministerial Statement that Singaporeans should be united in standing against hate speech, for the protection of racial and religious harmony in Singapore. I support the broad principle that we should have a calibrated approach to address offensive speech that may injure racial and religious harmony. But that is a motherhood statement. So, let me get down to details.
Sir, I do not think it is sufficient for the Government as a matter of public policy to take religions and cultures as they are, when deciding what is offensive speech. There are inherent contradictions between the great and historic truths embodied in different religious and cultural traditions. When these contradictions surface in public, people may and do take offence. This contradiction can only be resolved with the state promoting an enlightened and neutral secularism that respects all religions and races but which also firmly pushes back on attempts to encroach on the public space to the detriment of all.
Sir, let me explain what I mean by this basic contradiction. I believe this House accepts that every major religion has at heart certain great truths about the purpose of life and the way we should live a meaningful life. Those who are non-religious also seek meaning and purpose in life. This is a natural response to the question of human existence.
But the problem is that all these great truths cannot be truthful all at once; and even if by divine providence they are, human practice inevitably corrupts the truth. Because great truths compel us to put principles into practice, the end result is that offence can and will be taken.
Consider the following. Christianity would not exist if Jesus had not driven out the merchants and the money changers from the Temple and created the conditions for a social revolution.
The Protestant churches would not exist if Martin Luther had not published his 95 theses against the abuses of the medieval Catholic Church.
Islam would not exist if the Prophet, peace be upon him, had not put divine revelation into practice by mobilising society against the injustice of his time.
All of these acts, while creating great religions would have caused great offence to the entrenched communities of the time.
The problem is that beliefs and culture are not just private matters. The world's great religions are great because they provide us a framework of how to live. The racial groups that make up Singapore likewise have centuries of culture and practice which still guide modern life. And so it is inevitable that one man's belief or culture when put into the public sphere may give offence to another. A basic example is the prohibition on food, which can be religious or cultural. What do you do when simple consumption of food in plain sight – whether it is pork, beef, alcohol, other animals – is normal to some but gives offence to others? What about refusal to consume food that is thought to be consecrated to another religion or to be unclean? What if that also gives offence?
Sir, the list could go on. But the point is clear. This is the essential contradiction we are faced with. A great truth that motivates people to live their lives according to a higher purpose must at some point face entrenched interests and different ways of life. As a result, many great truths when put into practice, will be regarded as deeply offensive, just as others regard it as the gospel truth.
What then should the state do? First, I believe the state should reinforce a secular public policy space based on the founding principle that we are a multi-racial and religious society.
The public space is a common resource, a deep wellspring that sustains and refreshes the common spirit. If we had one overwhelmingly dominant religion and/or race then the question is one of tolerance of minorities and not of what the public space should be like. But as a multi-racial and religious society, each of our communities has different ideas about that public space. Our society must keep that common wellspring clear. If we each seek to dye the water according to our own particular persuasion, we will soon find that there is nothing but darkness there.
Therefore, the state must directly address, manage, and even reject when necessary attempts by religious and ethnic groups to advance public policy based on their own versions of the truth. This is so even when several religions or groups claim common cause. To take a current issue, many Singaporean Christians and Muslims believe that homosexual behaviour is offensive to their ideals of what the public space and the family should be. This is not the time to debate these views. The point is what is offensive to one group may not be so to another. To advocate public policy on the basis of shared religious interests, or a common feeling of offence across groups, risks normalising a dangerous principle, that religiously or racially held interests can shape the public sphere. Once that principle is normalised, no single religion or racial group can feel safe.
Next, our religious and racial communities must accept that they have a role to play in balancing the public exercise of their faith with an understanding that sensitivity bordering on intolerance will inevitably put each community against the other.
Sir, we are witnessing a shift towards the more public assertion of faith. While the vast majority today agree that our laws should not be based on religion, personal conscience matters. In the 2019 "Religion in Singapore: The Private and Public Spheres" Institute of Policy Studies report, Mathews, Lim and Selvarajan found that nearly two in three Christians, Catholics, and Muslims claimed they would follow religious principles over a conflicting secular law. Moreover, a substantial minority of Christians, Catholics and Muslims believe it is acceptable for religious leaders to speak on changes to the law which are in conflict with religious principles.
Taken by itself, there is nothing wrong with putting principles into action this way. It is an authentic expression of the human spirit in public life. But the question for us is whether we are able to accept and make such religiously motivated arguments without giving or taking offense, and whether we can come to a consensus to accept a settled question of public policy even when it conflicts with our personal principles. In short, any assertiveness based on religious principle must be matched by an equal open mindedness to accept honest disagreements without taking offence.
Sir, Government policy cannot replace the role of the community. I agree that Government must continue to pursue a balanced framework that takes into consideration deep-seated harm to an entire community and not just the most sensitive members of that community. But what happens when the tenor of sensitivity changes with time, and what was formerly regarded as a secular problem becomes an article of faith? This is not an abstract problem. Even a balanced framework will be gradually driven into a corner where everything causes an offence and nothing is accepted if our racial and religious groups become more intolerant over time.
So, we are back to the deep question: who gets to decide if something gives offense? This debate will not settle the question. I share the Minister's views that it must be taken outside to the public as well but I have two principles to offer.
First, the question of offence cannot simply be left to community views, given the strict laws we have in place. In a multi-religious and racial society, this may lead to the "weaponisation" of the law against other communities and the public space, as Prof Cherian George has argued. The state must work with the community to robustly defend the public space.
Second, intent must be considered together with the question of offence. When the intention is to honestly criticise or to promote an alternative social or religious principle that conflicts with entrenched interests, this is the contest of ideas at work and we suppress it at our own peril. Indeed, the early Catholic Church, Islam, and the Protestant Church spread despite repression because society recognised the great truths embodied in these religious ideals. Academics, journalists and civil society alike need the freedom to ask and answer inconvenient questions about race and religion that may offend some. Of course, some honestly held views today are considered so offensive that I do not think we will see them contested openly in the near future. The issue of conversion is also deeply sensitive. But that does not mean we should not try to advance the principle that intent matters and not just the degree of offence taken.
Mr Deputy Speaker, as the Government notes, Singapore’s racial and religious harmony is not a natural product. It is the result of careful cooperation between the state and society. But we should go beyond just taking community views or considerations as given. To do otherwise would be to cede the public space slowly over time as each community uses their power to shape the public space in accordance with their own way of life.
Sir, the good thing about being a multi-racial and religious society is that each of us will quickly realise in one sphere or another of life we are a minority. We must promote an enlightened secularism to protect the public space in the interests of all. We must remember that while each of us belong to minorities of our own, we share a common spirit as human beings and citizens of Singapore. Mr Deputy Speaker, I support the Motion.
: Assalaamu'alaikum, Peace be Upon you all. What happened in New Zealand recently at the two mosques was tragic and unexpected. On behalf of all Singaporeans, I would like to sincerely offer our condolences to the families that had lost their loved ones. May their souls rest in peace and in eternal happiness.
Mr Deputy Speaker, before I begin, I would like to address a Singaporean mother and her family who lost their son in the recent Christchurch terror attack. In Malay, please.
I offer my condolences to Mdm Noraini Abbas from Singapore, Mr John Milne and their whole family for their family’s great loss, the late Sayyad Milne. May the late Sayyad Milne be granted a place in the highest level of Paradise in eternal happiness.
Mdm Noraini Abbas, we are with you. Singapore is with you and your family, as you mourn the loss of your beloved son, Sayyad Milne.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I really do not know where to begin or how to begin after hearing our hon Minister's speech. The various events happening worldwide have been saddening. Generation after generation, the words Hate or Hate speech have been very powerful, that causes one to act irrationally and drastically. It can be anyone unassuming, regardless of his race, colour or religious belief and to a point of, in Islam we say breaking Siratul Rahim – breaking the bonds between mankind using fear, hate, anger, jealousy, greed and even innocence.
This makes me wonder what is that trigger point that the power of hate or hate speech have over man? It can take over a person’s logical power of thinking and reasoning to reach a point of irrational behaviour, to hate and even to kill. Wisdom is gone forever from their hearts when hate takes over their mind. Who suffers? The innocent bystanders, the innocent child, the innocent people working hard to earn a living to feed their love ones.
Mr Deputy Speaker Sir, in the Minister's speech, he raised an important point and said he would like to hear the Members' opinion as to how best can we protect our country with all the issues the Minister had highlighted. A wise man once said, "Tie the rosary beads too tight and they would surely break and fall with great impact uncontrollably. Tie it too loose, they would also naturally fall apart. So best is to take the middle way, not too tight and not too loose. There is an old saying tie your camel before it goes astray."
About two weeks ago, we all read in shock about the news of a 28-year-old Australian, radicalised by Islamophobic material online, who attacked two mosques in Christchurch, killing 50 and injuring many others. Amidst the grief, despair and anger, the tragic event in Christchurch has created a cause for a deeper reflection of the significant challenges to extremism. Over the last few weeks, many news commentaries and reports have discussed gun laws, the role of social media, white supremacy and anti-Muslim rhetoric.
As a multicultural and multi-religious society, we have developments that have an impact on our social cohesion in Singapore. Positive and meaningful social exchanges between different races and religious groups create the foundation for social cohesion. Like a rich tapestry, our Singapore story is alive only because of the fine, interwoven threads of social interactions. Today, at the national, community and ground-up level, we have a number of platforms and initiatives for different communities to come together, build mutual respect and trust and deepen understanding about one another.
However, as the Christchurch incident has reminded us, there is still much work that needs to be done. Underlying tensions, prejudice and stereotypes between different races and religions continue to be a challenge. Through my involvement in Roses of Peace, a ground-up non-profit organisation working on peace-building, we have observed many cases where members of the community have experienced micro-aggressions and discrimination.
It is thus important that we face squarely the challenges we have and find ways to proactively address it. As President Halimah Yacob noted after the Christchurch incident, the most important lesson for us is to fight all forms of xenophobia and hatred perpetrated simply on the basis of a person’s religion, colour or creed. Xenophobia and hatred can cut deep divisions among us, and allowed hatred to spread, and this cannot be prevented easily.
As a community, I believe it is important for us to have honest and meaningful conversations beyond the polite niceties, of what is going on. Such conversations may be unpleasant at some points and to people in general, but this is an opportunity to talk about their own experiences, in what they face in life and to listen to others and understand and come to reach an understanding. By allowing for more honest and meaningful dialogue and interaction, we can address such misinformation as well as common stereotypes, which often serve as the primary driver of prejudice.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, many Members would have read about the Institute of Policy Studies report on race and religious relations in Singapore that was released last Thursday as highlighted by some Members earlier. While the survey highlighted that the vast majority of respondents affirmed that race or religion were not a barrier to social cohesion, it revealed some interesting findings which should be a cause of reflection and concern for us as a diverse and multi-ethnic society.
The survey found that one in four respondents had no qualms about letting religious extremists publish their views online or hold public meetings to talk about them. This number was much higher, close to 50%, amongst younger Singaporeans. Around 15% of respondents also found Muslims at least somewhat threatening. This was higher than any other religious group, with a notable number staying in private housing.
The hon Minister has spoken about the rise of Islamophobia over the years on multiple occasions. The recent IPS findings certainly reflect this concerning trend. As a society, it is not good enough say that 85% of Singaporeans do not espouse such sentiments. Fifteen percent is statistically significant, and in fact is roughly the size of the our entire Malay/Muslim population in Singapore. Worryingly, I also observed that many netizens online questioned the validity of the findings or simply dismissed it.
Just two days ago, Roses of Peace organised a youth forum titled, "Aftermath of Christchurch – Lessons for Singapore." About 120 youths participated in the session and we had a robust discussion on the multiculturalism in Singapore. The findings from the latest IPS study was a keen topic of discussion, and many of the youths found the findings troubling. There was a collective sense that as a country and nation, we can do better.
In this regard, I would like to raise some suggestions.
First, to provide education of our diverse, multicultural social fabric. I believe more can be done to educate our youth, from a young age, on the various religious beliefs, ethnic traditions and cultural practices in Singapore. We have such a rich cultural and social heritage that needs to be appreciated by all. Beyond the common ties that bind us, we should also focus on helping our youth understand the unique elements of each faith traditions in Singapore.
At the same time, I urge the Government to equip our students with necessary skill sets for effective dialogues and discussions on difficult and sensitive topics revolving around race and religion. This will help us be better mediators when occasional conflicts or when disputes arise.
We should also create more safe spaces in schools and community where students are free to express their religious identity and for dialogues to take place in a mature and meaningful manner. In this regard, there is value in considering have a youth wing in all Inter-religious Confidence Circles (IRCCs) in Singapore, which can take the lead in spear-heading such initiatives.
Second, dealing with spread of hate speech in the digital space. With the prevalence of smart phones and rise of extremist views that can disseminate rapidly online, the impact of hate speech is amplified. Before the Christchurch attacks, the gunman published a manifesto on social media highlighting his extremist views. The live streaming of the attacks further amplified the impact of these attacks. In addition to all the existing efforts, we must all focus on equipping society, especially our youth with the tools and skills necessary to compete effectively with extreme voices in our new digital ecosystem. In this regard, I would like to call for greater collaboration and partnership between civil society and non-profit organisations with tech companies such as Facebook, Twitter and Google to trial innovative community-based solutions. For example, we can develop a Digital Playbook to educate and equip fellow citizens with the knowledge and tools to counter hate speech and fake news. Such a book can detail the strategies that ordinary citizens can adopt to identify and push back on such propaganda.
Thirdly, although we have Racial Harmony Day, to place greater emphasis on the importance of religious harmony in Singapore, I would like to recommend the adoption of the World Interfaith Harmony Week in Singapore. This was first proposed at the UN General Assembly on 23 September 2010 by HM King Abdullah II of Jordan. Just under a month later, on 20 October 2010, it was unanimously adopted by the UN and henceforth the first week of February will be observed as a World Interfaith Harmony Week.
This week can be an occasion for us to celebrate the rich diversity of religions that harmoniously co-exist in Singapore and promote deeper appreciation and tolerance through a series of exhibitions, performances and talks.
Singaporeans tend to treat discussions on religion as sensitive and potentially divisive. However, there is an imminent need to do more to bring such conversations to intersect with a wider societal audience. This is especially so in workplaces to foster better appreciation of people’s faith, beliefs and to encourage employees to be proud of their identity. There is value for organisations to set aside one day in a year, perhaps during the Interfaith Harmony Week, to celebrate diversity in their work places. As the largest employer in Singapore, perhaps the public service can take the lead in this.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Singapore's social harmony is not by chance, and it should never be taken for granted. Singapore is the world's most religiously diversed country, multiculturalism, multi-religiosity and multiracialism are key tenets of our national values.
However, to protect the peace and stability that we have, we need everyone to play a role and to play their part. Everyone has a role in calling out hate speech and not being a silent bystander.
We have been tireless in our efforts at building this precious social harmony over the past five decades. Although we often claim that we are a work in progress, I hope Singapore will shine as a beacon of hope and serve as a role model to other nations struggling with social integration at the upcoming International Conference on Cohesive Societies.
Lastly, we cannot deepen racial and religious understanding without deepening our cultural understanding. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I would like to conclude my speech in Tamil.
(255, 255, 255
)
;">(
In Tamil
)
:
[
Please refer to
In Singapore, we have to understand our culture very well so as to continuously remain as one united society, with racial and religious harmony.
For instance, in the past 13 years, for the whole month of April, the Tamil Language Festival takes place. Such language-based festivals not only help us nurture our Mother Tongue, but also help us to understand our own culture better. To enhance racial and religious harmony, such festivals about Mother Tongue should take place continuously.
In addition to understanding one’s own cultural pride and glory, it is also very important for everyone to also understand clearly the culture of other racial and religious groups. In particular, our youths having the right understanding of all races will promote harmony amongst us. Understanding culture correctly will enhance family and social ties, thereby benefiting every household and the country. For us to interact and communicate together with the people of a multi-racial society, an understanding of each other’s culture will provide great assurance.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, with that, I thank Minister Shanmugam for moving the Motion and I support the Motion.
: Ms Rahayu Mahzam.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, in the wake of the horrific Christchurch shootings, Australian Senator Fraser Anning said, "Muslims may be the victims today; usually, they are the perpetrators." He also said that the real cause of bloodshed on New Zealand streets is the immigration programme which allowed Muslim fanatics to migrate to New Zealand in the first place. These remarks are hurtful to Muslims, especially during a time of grief, exposes an ignorance of the true Islamic faith and a lack of acknowledgment that terrorism does not choose its victims.
Many people all around the world condemned his insensitive remarks and some labelled his statement as hate speech. There were, however, those who appeared to show support for the Senator. This was highlighted in the commentary by Michael Yong featured by CNA, where the writer expressed concern regarding the nearly 10 petitions set up on
Change.org, a popular petition site, to protect Anning's right to freedom of speech. He also referred to posts and groups standing "in solidarity" with Anning and calling for people to "respect his freedom of speech". The numbers of these groups of people may be relatively smaller and their views are not mainstream opinions but this fact is still disconcerting.
Just last week in Singapore, the Institute of Policy Studies published a working paper on religion. The findings of the survey, which were part of a global study, alluded to some worrying facts.
Researchers noted that a sizeable number of Singaporeans have no qualms about allowing religious extremists to publish their views online or hold public meetings to talk about them. Roughly four in 10 younger people aged between 18 and 25 years old felt that publishing was acceptable, possibly because of this group's increasingly liberal attitudes towards free speech.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the "freedom of speech" argument is often raised when there is action by authorities that is perceived to restrict one’s rights. There is an almost automatic perception that restriction is bad and would gnaw on our civil liberties. Proponents of free speech often argue that it is a fundamental right. It is said that we need to allow for the marketplace of ideas to flourish and people should be allowed to come to their own conclusions about matters. In Singapore, there is a particular concern that the presence of many stringent rules would silence many, because of the fear of crossing the line. It limits open and meaningful discourse which may actually help clarify doubts and strengthen communal relations.
We do need to embrace diversity of opinions and allow for a healthy discourse of even the most sensitive of issues. It leads to better understanding and diversity can be a strength if ideas can be synergised and used for the good of the people. However, differences in views can also be a potential divisive factor that can tear our social fabric. Worse, an extreme view; an expression that spreads, incites, promotes or justifies racial or religious hatred can be damaging to a community.
We, therefore, need a good framework in place that allows for open and candid discussions in safe spaces and for appropriate restrictions to be implemented to safeguard and protect our harmony. I believe we also need a multi-pronged approach by having both legislation and education to address this issue. We need to also ensure that our people are edified, are sensible and sensitive, know what to reject and object to and that the right with free speech comes with responsibility and accountability for what is said.
As a matter of principle, I believe there is general agreement amongst the public that we need to take effort to maintain racial and religious harmony in Singapore. Most people would agree that we should do this through education, through the creation of common spaces and opportunities for social bonding as well as creation of safe spaces for meaningful discourse. Many, possibly a lesser number, would agree that appropriate legislation needs to be in place to manage inappropriate conduct or expression that could incite racial or religious hatred. My personal view is that we need to have legislation. We cannot do without drawing a line that sets out what is criminal, what is unacceptable to a society. Appropriate punishment deters unsavoury conduct and helps shape the society’s norms.
The difficulty is that what is expressed may lie in a spectrum of what is deemed hateful or offensive. If something said is offensive but falls short of being hateful, then what do we do? I do not think we can just let it slide. There must be a response as offensive speech also damages a society, albeit at a different pace. An indifference to something that is offensive can potentially normalise that expression in the long run and desensitise people to what is unacceptable.
The Government cannot take a hands-off approach. I believe that there needs to still be some legislative restriction depending on the situation but there needs to also be a whole lot of edification and an effort to sensitise the individual making the offensive speech to understand the harm he or she is causing to the community.
On this note, I believe the approach taken with Imam Nalla, some time back when he recited a supplication which offended the Jews and the Christians, was a correct one. He had to receive the punishment but the resolution of the matter was done in a respectful manner and he apologised to the Christian leaders and the Rabbi. The line was drawn in that matter.
As we come across various instances of inappropriate conducts in the future, there needs to be a calibration and assessment of the harm done to the community. I think it would be impossible to set out an exhaustive definition of offensive expressions and we would probably have to look at each case in context. I therefore accept and agree with the Government’s current framework of assessing in material the context and the impact to the particular community towards which the harm may be caused, and in particular to benchmark it to the mainstream views within the community.
As we go down the spectrum of hateful and offensive expressions, we would reach the milder end of the expressions. There may be casual racism, inappropriate stereotype jokes, unspoken discomfort and even silent intolerance of another community. I do not think it is practical or even meaningful to legislate regulations for these conduct. But there is still a need to educate and allow for discourse.
In this regard, I refer to another piece of finding from the recent IPS paper which I referred to earlier which has caused me great concern. More than 70% of Singaporeans feel that people of different faiths can get along when living close together, but some 15% find Muslims threatening. Researchers found that those who dwell in private housing were more likely to think that Muslims are threats, compared with those who dwell in HDB flats. IPS senior research fellow Dr Mathew Mathews said, "There is little question that global terror and how it has often been associated with Muslims has fed into the minds of a small group of Singaporeans, who thus feel that Muslims are threatening."
It is a solemn reality that Muslims here in Singapore must face. But I think there is much that could be done to create opportunities for greater understanding and for strengthening inter-racial relations. Mr Deputy Speaker, allow me to speak in Malay.
I refer to the latest Working Paper by the Institute of Policy Studies (IPS). One of the published findings was about the percentage of Singaporeans that find Muslims threatening. Fifteen percent of the respondents stated this. This is certainly not the perception of the majority of respondents that were surveyed. However, to me, the number is not small.
This is a reality that Muslims in Singapore have to overcome. The issue of terrorism around the world and the past actions of ISIS to spread their message certainly had an impact on non-Muslims. We can decide how we want to face these issues. We can choose to feel anger or disappointment but this will not change anything. I think we can adopt a more positive approach by seeking opportunities to continue building good relations with the other communities in Singapore. We can portray the true beauty of Islam and offer the hand of friendship to our fellow non-Muslim members of society. I am confident that with this approach, the other communities will gain a better understanding of our religion and values.
Mr Deputy Speaker, allow me to conclude in English. As a minority in Singapore, there are occasions when some things said or done by others from other races or religion may offend me or my community. Often, such conduct comes from a space of ignorance and not malice. There is therefore a great need to continue to foster relations between people from different communities and allow for better understanding.
I am truly grateful though for the ability to practise my religion without fear for my safety. I am truly grateful that many in the community can look beyond my tudung and embrace me for who I am. I am truly grateful for a Government that speaks out against Islamophia even before it became fashionable to do so and continues to take the effort to protect interests of all in the community, including the minority groups.
I am, therefore, supportive of the Government’s efforts in putting appropriate restrictions to maintain racial and religious harmony in Singapore.
: Er Dr Lee Bee Wah.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I thank the Minister for this important debate and I support the Motion. As I have shared in this House before, I grew up in the turbulent 1960s in Malaysia. Those years were marred with several racial conflicts that saw many lives lost. There were curfews and even as a kid, I could sense that something was wrong. Sometimes, adults would gather and speak with low voices, their eyebrows furrowed. I would then later learn that somebody whom they knew had been killed in the riots.
These racial conflicts were fuelled by hate speech between races and religions. And they happened in Singapore too. It is only because of our efforts to build racial and religious harmony that they have become much rarer today.
It is easy to take harmony for granted. But, in fact, we face new challenges to maintaining harmony. Over the world, there are people pursuing extremist ideologies. And because of our open society and the internet, we hear of them through many sources.
Hate speech is linked to radicalisation. When you are influenced to hate a certain group, it is not a big jump to then take violent actions against that group. And once that happens, it will set off a cycle of hate and even more violence. We need to continue keeping our people safe.
To preserve harmony, we need to take a firm stand against hate speech. Words can move emotion and give rise to hate, distrust and destruction. It takes weeks to create distrust and to sow the seeds of discontent. But it takes years and even generations to heal the wounds thereafter.
When restricting hate speech, we must apply the law impartially to protect all racial and religious groups. If there is any suspicion that the law is not applied impartially, it will sow discord between groups. Certain groups might even start to suspect the Government, which will undermine our society and security.
I urge anyone who hears of hate speech against your community, to make a report. Do not spread in your community that the rules are not applied fairly. That is a very dangerous perception and will spread faster than you think. When the information is clarified, it will not spread as far as the original rumour. Especially if you are a public figure or an influencer, be very careful on such matters.
I feel some senior Singaporeans, who have been through the mayhem of riots, can put their experience to good use. Government should tap on this group to be ambassadors of goodwill on the ground. In Chinese, please.
We will not tolerate anyone to spread hate speech against any race or religion. Hate speech can influence people and they might stage an attack on other races and religions. This will severely harm our racial and religious harmony and even result in a series of revenge actions.
In Singapore, we will be applying the law impartially to protect all racial and religious groups. If you hear anyone making hate speech against a certain community, please report to the Police so that Ministry of Home Affairs will have time to investigate and take actions. Do not spread words among the community that the Ministry of Home Affairs did not take any action. Such kind of rumours spreads very quickly and it is very dangerous.
Some Singaporeans have been through the mayhem of riots. I hope the Government can invite them to share their experiences so that every Singaporean can understand why there is a need to resist hate speech.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, in the end, we just need to remember just one thing. Hate speech goes against the founding principles of Singapore – to be one united people, regardless of race, language, or religion. We need to take a firm stand against it.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I want to talk about three ideas which underline Singapore's approach to hate speech – two conceptual and one practical. The first is on non-fundamentalist approach to freedom of speech and expression; the second, our pre-emptive approach to hate speech legislation and last, a warning against toothless legislation.
In 2015, the British press, unlike some newspapers in Europe, collectively decided not to republish the caricatures of Prophet Muhammad which led to the slaughter of 12 staff working in the office of Charlie Hebdo. The Guardian newspaper argued that in Britain, editorial decisions have always been guided, not just by law, but by a sense of "what is fair and tolerable within British society". The press in Singapore here too, did not publish the cartoons. Further, the version of The Economist which was distributed in Singapore had the cartoon redacted.
Tribal instincts cannot be eradicated, nor should we want to. The irrationality of love is matched, and often outmatched, by the irrationality of hate. Even as we promote our best selves, we must constrain our worst. We do this softly through education, moral suasion and social norms. But we must also do this with unequivocal force through the smite of laws and their strict enforcement.
Many countries have laws against hate speech. In the UK, laws make it an offence for a person to use "threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour that causes, or is likely to cause another person harassment, alarm or distress". This law has been revised over the years to include language that is deemed to incite "racial and religious hatred", as well as "hatred on the grounds of sexual orientation" and language that "encourages terrorism".
In 2016, the EU established the Code of Conduct, as a push for social media platforms to crack down on hate speech. Subsequently, four giant IT companies – Google+, Instagram, Snapchat and Dailymotion – they decided to join the EU "Code of Conduct on countering illegal hate speech online".
Our Home Affairs Minister has pointed out the relatively lax legislation both in UK and US.
This is not because they do not see hate speech as wrong, but because they see freedom of expression as right. Two wrongs do not make a right, but what do two rights make? When the right to freedom of expression is fundamental, and the right to freedom of religious belief is fundamental, what do we do?
The extreme liberal approach is to do nothing and let the two fundamentals contest in the open. That is one approach but that is certainly not ours. We cannot leave it to the law of the jungle. We cannot say, "This is not a government problem. Let the people fight it out. Let the people sort it out among themselves."
We must say, as we are doing today, "This is allowed in the public space – and that is not." Our laws must provide guidance on the clash of rights, not just in court but in everyday life. This is my first point about the non-fundamentalist nature of our approach to freedoms of expression.
My second point relates to hate speech legislation and the degree to which it should be regulated. I mentioned about the Charlie Hebdo incident and Singapore's strong stance against publishing images offensive to members of our community. In this case, because of the tragic murder, there were few critics of what we did. But remember: we had censored the images in advance of the shootings.
We did so because it was wrong, and the nature of this "wrong" is that it is against the norms of what we stand for, as well as the possible harms that could arise. In most cases, the actions we take are in advance of these harms, that is, we take a pre-emptive approach to minimise harm.
This opens us up to criticism of being overly authoritarian, of infantilising the public, or not respecting people's ability to govern, control or decide for themselves. Why so hyper-sensitive? "What is the harm?", people ask.
We may be able to outline these harms, but if we do our job well, the public may never experience them, and hence, never believe that the risk of such harm was real. This creates a very different kind of problem. A dilemma that we need to solve.
And this brings me to my last point about whether we ought to enforce our laws relating to hate speech strictly or loosely. The second method allows people to experience harm in small measure and by the logic of vaccination, builds up our resilience and ability to debate contested ideas. I agree that contestation of ideas and debate is valuable in many areas, but relating to this body of legislation, I argue for a strict application.
Why? The point has been made by Minister for Home Affairs – the nature of law flows to the nature of the country. We, in this House, can choose whether we want to be more pro-active and tough in the applications of our laws, especially when these are extended to new hard cases.
So, I would rather be conservative and safe than experimental and sorry. Many older societies have seen the fractures, fissures and wounds which once opened up are hard to heal, especially on matters relating to race and religion.
Standing against this, our existing laws may be good enough as there are adequate provisions. So, I argue that what we need is tighter and pro-active enforcement. Strong enforcement will also provide deterrent effects because knowing that the Government is serious about enforcement has real consequences on behaviour – both among the people and corporations.
In 2017, Germany became the first country in the EU to introduce a dedicated law against online hate speech that allows authorities to fine social media companies who fail to remove hate speech posts that violate German law within 24 hours. Companies could be fined up to 50 million euros under the law. This came about after the German government examined a report showing a 77% surge in hate crimes in Germany in the previous year.
As an immediate response to the law, in January and February 2017, Youtube deleted 90% of hate speech videos reported by users, Twitter deleted 1%, Facebook deleted 39%.
So, laws have effect, but not all the time. We see this in the continued existence of hate speech, instances of clear violations that persist with impunity.
Australia, for example, does not have a strong record of confronting white nationalism. In recent years, we see Government senators voting for a motion that it is "okay to be white". We have seen politicians there saying that the real cause of the New Zealand streets tragedy to be "the immigration program that allowed Muslim fanatics to migrate to New Zealand in the first place" and these politicians have gotten away scot-free. So, this is not because Australia does not have laws against hate speech, although some may argue that such laws have been weakened in recent years, but it is because there is a political culture there that tolerates such open airing of views. A flexible enforcement of laws may be one way of coping with the clash of two fundamentals, but as I have said before, it is not Singaporeans' way.
Ours is a more difficult, more rigid, and some would say, less liberal model. This may indeed be so, but it is a choice that does not denigrate freedoms in general, but instead, respects as many freedoms as possible. It certainly does not place the freedom to express hate over the freedom to practice one's religion.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I spoke about tribal instincts which cannot be denied. Such instincts create mistrust, hostility and as we have seen in recent days, death and dissolution. But our tribal instinct also creates heroes, when the best among us strives to protect the rest, when we see altruism, kindness, fair play, duty and sacrifice.
We cannot legislate heroism, no more than we can outlaw villainy. But we can and must use laws to give the best chance for our ambitions to do good, and to constrain, deter and severely punish those who plan to do evil.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, before I begin my speech, I would like to thank Member Lee Bee Wah for her heartfelt plea to preserve our harmony. Sir, I rise in support of the Motion.
Freedom of speech comes with a cost. When this means excluding communities and fracturing our society, it is a cost that we cannot bear. In its simplest form, hate speech can manifest in a single tweet or a passing comment. Yet, malicious content and intent can easily create unfounded fear and suspicion. With the expansion of new platforms, hate speech can now come in numerous forms of expression which proliferates, incites or legitimises any form of hatred based on intolerance. In a multicultural state like Singapore, it is inevitable that societal fault lines exist. However, hate speech exploits and deepens these fault lines, creating an echo chamber, polarising our society, and threatens the very essence of our existence.
For this reason, I am glad that our approach to the increasing prevalence of hate speech has been a firm ban against it – in any form, in any medium. Whilst other countries may allow it in the name of freedom of speech, here, we recognise the very real and severe implications that hate speech can have. Such an approach has helped to prevent fault lines in our society from being exploited by individuals or groups with extremist agendas. It has become increasingly apparent that extremist groups on both ends of the spectrum feed off each other’s intolerance. By doing so, they create animosity where there were none, suspicion which was previously absent and divisions in place of unity.
With the increased prevalence of hate speech and efforts to curb it, our society now begins to question whether the provisions we have are sufficient or even necessary. Where does hate speech begin and how can we terminate its progression? Seemingly innocuous offensive comments may lead to the development of hate speech. Yet, it is difficult to draw a definitive line as to what should be banned or not. This is particularly because offensive speech exists on a continuum of varying levels of hostility. Hence, it is pertinent that such cases still be evaluated on a case-by-case basis to consider the context and content of such statements.
A similar challenge faced in eradicating hate speech is its prevalence in different mediums. Music, in particular, is an effective platform to instill and spread notions of animosity. Music can be weaponised as it easily desensitises one to hateful perceptions. The frequent exposure to such themes in unconventional genres can legitimise and deepen intolerance. Whilst Singaporeans have the freedom to access various forms of entertainment, music that undermines our social and cultural stability is untenable. Hence, the regulation of music and entertainment is crucial to preventing the spread of hate.
Whilst we may think of our multiracial and multi-religious harmony as a delicate balance that needs to be protected, there is room for constructive efforts to strengthen our community's resilience in facing hate. Within our local community, artists can provide a countervailing narrative towards hate speech. In this way, music can be utilised to deepen interactions and strengthen our community. In my role in the Malay Language Council and Malay Language Learning and Promotion Committee, I have engaged many professionals in the music, art and literature fraternities. Amongst these individuals, I am pleased to share that there is a resounding rejection against music, art and literature that purported hateful sentiments. Sir, allow me to continue my speech in Malay.
In the Malay community, our identity is reflected in our community's traditional practices or in the way we portray ourselves to the other communities. Hate speech will only isolate and segregate the minority communities.
In our daily actions and conduct, we should rightly display empathy and kindness. By doing so, we can reject any hate statement that has no basis whatsoever. At the same time, we must not be influenced by those who want to fan the flames of hatred between us and the other communities. We must be aware of their evil intentions that will only serve to separate us from other Singaporeans.
Graciousness and civility form the core of our identity. These values remind us that hate speech contradicts the principles that we adhere to. We must not get involved in spreading hate speech through social media. Otherwise, we will destroy our community. It is our responsibility to counter such false statements. There is a Malay saying "When you pinch the left thigh, the right thigh feels painful too" and, thus, we must be sensitive to the well-being of those who become targets of hate speech.
In our effort to fight hate speech together, we must build our resilience against statements tinged with hatred. Through literature, the arts and music, we can send messages or reminders that promote cohesion. Among all the platforms that are available to us, music is most prominent as the unifying tool that can counter influences that promote enmity.
Music activists that I have approached have unanimously rejected aspects of hate speech in their lyrics, songs and performances. These activists, who come from different backgrounds and comprise young and experienced musicians, say that the music they play contain positive elements and support the cohesion and development of society and nation.
Another specific example from our community is the Dikir Barat performance which we can use to counter hate speech.
Mr Djohan Abdul Rahman, the founder of the Andika Kencana group, as well as the former president of the Dikir Barat Federation and member of ASAS' 50 shared with me that: "Lyrics play an important role in any Dikir Barat performance. Therefore, negative lyrics that fan the flames of hatred and violence will have a negative impact on the arts community."
These influences will spread to other arts activists and participants who are accustomed to such themes through rehearsals and performances.
Therefore, Dikir Barat lyrics promote a harmonious living environment and sharing of experiences and shared values. Dikir Barat activists have consciously strived to strengthen social cohesion as a weapon to counter hate sentiments.
Cikgu Suratman Markasan, a recipient of the Cultural Medallion, as well as a Tun Sri Lanang Award winner and an important figure in the Southeast Asia Literary Council (Mastera), pointed out that literary works promoting hatred towards other communities do not represent values that are present in the Malay culture and, therefore, should not be encouraged or read.
There is a song by Ramli Sarip, where the lyrics go like this:
"Listen not to false poetry
Because it will tarnish your soul
Listen to poetry that we inherited
Passed down through the generations until today."
His song carries the theme of brotherhood and love for one another. Certainly, these are the values that we should promote.
Allow me to continue my speech in English.
Besides removing hate speech from our media platforms, the best protection against hateful sentiments is the strength of the community. This is because hate speech is not just a means of expression but a reflection of deeper attitudes and perceptions. To make our communities less susceptible to the manipulation of such hateful narratives, we need to increase the depth of our cross-cultural and religious exchanges. It comes in the most proximate groups of people we interact with: our neighbours, colleagues and peers. It is important to deepen such relations to gain a personal understanding of the cultures and customs of different peoples. Recognise that tolerance and understanding are not enough to deter hate; trust is what we need.
This is especially pertinent, given that trust is not a given in a multicultural society. Not even in Singapore. A recent IPS Survey showed that 15% of respondents found Muslims threatening. This means that Singapore’s multi-religious fabric is still vulnerable to the threat of hate speech. While in this case it reveals how continuous and heightened reporting of terrorism by some in the name of Islam has brought out misgivings to the Muslims in Singapore, more importantly, it indicates that more than just being inclusive, our communities need to be build confidence and trust with each other. This work is never done because every incident causes a backslide.
This building of trust starts from home, too. When our children have their first interactions with others from different races or religions, it helps for us to guide them along and answer their queries. More importantly, we should encourage a sense of empathy in our children to humanise Singaporeans from different racial and religious groups. It can come in the little things – inviting their friends over for festivals or advising against any hateful comments spreading on social media. As their closest advisors, we provide the next generation the way forward in the uncertain terrain of these times, often ridden with hate.
Sir, as a minority, I welcome Minister Shanmugam's and the Government's assurances on this matter. I am sure other minorities do so. Our Government's stand would give all minorities the confidence that they would be protected from the target of hate, their culture would preserved and they can practise their religions peacefully. All of us, as minorities, should play our part, too. My community, too. We should never leave this to chance. I call upon our community leaders to lead and steward the community to be appreciative of how precious our social compact is and be active to preserve.
Sir, as a Singaporean, I pledge to play my part in strengthening our social compact and contribute to the building of confidence and trust in our society. I call upon all my Parliamentary colleagues and fellow Singaporeans in making this pledge.
Sir, ultimately, as a country, we need to protect our unity. Hate speech thrives on divisions and schisms. To deny its influence, there must be a common conviction against intolerance. This means standing up for groups that are targeted by hate speech. This means providing comfort for others who feel alienated. This means feeling for others even though we belong to a different race or religious group. The challenge of hate speech means our community needs to move beyond being understanding and tolerant. We are now called upon to support, protect and defend one another.
: Minister Shanmugam.
: Thank you, Deputy Speaker, Sir. I thank the Members who have spoken. I think the collective position of this House is clear. Hate speech impacts racial and religious harmony and Members agree generally that in dealing with hate speech, we have to intervene early and decisively. On offensive speech that may not be considered hate speech, Members agree that we need to have restrictions. Offensive speech can segue into hate speech, can overlap and, if we allow offensive speech into religion, politics, media, entertainment, the tone and texture of public discourse will change. Giving offence will be normalised.
I think there is broad support, based on the speeches, for the approach that I have outlined and it is very heartening that Government Members of Parliament, Opposition, Nominated Members of Parliament broadly agreed to these principles.
Let me try and deal with the specific questions.
Mr Pritam Singh asked some questions about the processes between IMDA and MHA. I have explained that in some detail in my opening speech. IMDA checked with MHA on security considerations. MHA withdrew its objections, as I explained earlier. A few days later – I think two days later – MHA gave advice to cancel. And I have explained that also at quite some length just earlier.
He also asked about the reasons for cancellation of the concert – again, I do not think he wants me to go into the detail that I have given in my opening speech. I think the Member broadly agrees with the principles but he had a question on the cancellation of Watain, specifically.
He accepted that he was not aware of the opposition of mainstream Christian viewpoint. That was an important point. And now that I have explained that to him, I think he will appreciate that; and in turn, that is relevant for the broader security considerations and assessment as well in the way that I explained in my opening speech. And I think the Member would accept that it then becomes a question of judgement.
Mr Pritam Singh also made some comparisons with bands in the past. I think in all of these things, the population, the reactions are dynamic. The population's views are dynamic. Reactions change over periods of time. We have to assess it with the facts we have and not be wishful about what it was, and what it might be in the distant future. So, population, reactions, specific bands, time period – these are all relevant considerations. You have to make an honest assessment based on all of those with the reactions that you have, whether it is mainstream reaction, and how it would impact on specific security situations as well as the broader security considerations.
The Member asked about future applications in general. I have explained the framework. There is no change in IMDA’s framework on content regulation – it has worked very well so far. They have had to apply it and they have applied it in all these years. There is also no change in MHA's approach to these issues.
IMDA in fact has to make a series of decisions – tough calls – on a broad variety of issues going well beyond the security issues. They make these calls every day. In fact, I would say security stricto sensu is in fact the easier issue, compared with the kind of issues IMDA has to deal with when faced with any kind of application.
We, MHA, give our views to MCI. We had not anticipated the subsequent developments. Both Ministries worked together. That is how the Government works. And it is not as if MCI wanted to proceed in any event, or that it was unaware of security considerations. MCI itself makes that call sometimes.
But here it is understandable that MHA picked it up – our agencies primary job is to keep in touch, close touch, with the religious communities, the leaders; we picked up on the mainstream Christian opinion within a day or so, made the security call, and discussed it with MCI.
I would add that this does not mean that there is any general ban on black metal groups – I think that was a point either the Member asked or sort of implied.
Now, let me turn to Mr Murali Pillai. He asked how to deprive commercial entities from making money and spreading hate speech. I think the points he made are valid; they need to be considered. And I think there were specific points on MRHA and ISA, and the extent of Government powers. I would say it has worked well so far. The Government's exercise of powers has been understood, and the constraints on the Government's exercise of power and safeguards in the legislation, as well as in the Constitution have been understood.
Ms Denise Phua asked what constitutes offensive speech. I have explained that earlier. We do not intervene in disagreements or arguments on public issues. WhatsApp and other platforms: I think these are legitimate questions. I cannot tell you that I have all the answers on those issues. But we will have to deal with them.
Enforcement – she asked about existing legislation and how we would fairly debate the approach. As I explained, the purpose of this debate is not to enforce something specifically. It is to set out the approach, clarify our approach, hear Members of Parliament again, have it debated – that is what this House is for. And then, hopefully with that, the population will also understand what the people's representatives are saying here, and what kind of approach we take.
Mr Christopher de Souza, Senior Parliamentary Secretary Sun Xueling, Mr Saktiandi Supaat, Ms Joan Pereira, Er Dr Lee Bee Wah, Senior Parliamentary Secretary Assoc Prof Muhammad Faishal Ibrahim, Mr Seah Kian Peng – we note their comments have been broadly supportive; they talked about how hate speech travels and how it fuels violence. Er Dr Lee spoke about her personal experiences, likewise we heard from the perspective of the minority community Members of Parliament. And Mr Seah's points on being conservative when it comes to this specific area, I think accords with what our society believes in and heels to the kind approach that we have set out.
I thank Prof Lim Sun Sun for her very powerful examples, very vivid. And I thank her for the points that she made. We do need to tackle hate speech online. I will say that we are very far from tackling it today. Nominated Member of Parliament Terence Ho made a number of points on the space for arts. I understand the points. I do not think there is any disagreement on that, that there should be cultural vibrancy. Equally, I do not think the Member disagrees that we cannot allow hate speech and we must restrict offensive speech. Those are the questions I raised for this debate. The points that he has raised more broadly on cultural vibrancy, I do not think, affect the narrower set of points I have made, and I do not think he disagrees with me.
Assoc Prof Walter Theseira made a very thoughtful speech. He made the point, tracing through the history of Islam and Christianity that is central to religion. He talked about Jesus, Martin Luther, the Prophet – all led movements to change. Yes, no arguments on that. Insofar as that is relevant to today's debate, I would say I cannot and I will not argue against that point, but also, I think the state has no role in either fomenting such change within religion or supporting one side or the other.
The second point he made was that religion should not impose its views on public policy. I will take that with the third point he made – that there has been a greater public assertion of fate. I think both points are valid. And in fact, the point that I think he is seeking to make, but perhaps did not put it quite so directly, is that if you give in to these greater public assertions of faith, and if people of religion become extremely sensitive, then there is a risk of cutting down public space. And that might then affect the secularity of government, not in the French sense, but in the sense that this Government is secular.
So, if we were to look at today's debate, I outlined one big risk in my opening speech which can arise from hate speech and offensive speech, the fault lines, the kind of violence that can arise from it and the deep splits between communities and religions, or religious groups.
Assoc Prof Walter Theseira hinted at another big risk – which is not within the frame of today's debate but I accept it as a risk – of religion either trying to influence public policy or narrowing public policy space.
And also something that he did not quite mention but flows from it – a political leadership which is not strong enough to stand on its two feet and seeks favours from particular religious groups or specific religious groups. It happens in many countries, including those in this region. That will lead to disaster; that will lead to a different type of government and public policy-making and it will not be a secular government.
The answer is you really need a strong political leadership which is fair between the different religions. People may be influenced by their religious outlook, but you do not make public policy based on a particular religious outlook, or a particular standpoint of a particular religion. Then, you will lose the faith of everybody else in society of a different outlook.
That has never been our position, and as long as the Government holds true to the values that have been set out, which I will not go into, then I think we will avoid that risk.
It is a risk. It is a risk because so many governments, both in this region and outside, have gone down that route. It is one of the easiest ways to get votes.
So, we have to make sure that we seek understanding between the religious groups, mutual respect with religious leaders in a multi-religious society. But I would suggest to Assoc Prof Theseira that that is perhaps a topic for another debate on another day, another Ministerial Statement, or the Member of Parliament can move a Motion.
Minister Grace Fu spoke about not just the rules, but also the need to make sure that we work very hard to make sure that our multi-religious approach works.
Sir, let me end this wrap-up by reading to this House the moving words of Imam Gamal Fouda of the Al Noor Mosque in Christchurch. On 22 March 2019, at a Memorial Service in Christchurch, this was what he said, and I am not going to read all of it, just some passages:
"Brothers and sisters in Islam, brothers and sisters in humanity, brothers and sisters in New Zealand. Last Friday I stood in this mosque and saw hatred and rage in the eyes of the terrorist, who killed and martyred 50 people, wounded 42 and broke the hearts of millions around the world.
Today, from the same place, I look out and see the love and compassion in the eyes of thousands of fellow New Zealanders, fellow human beings from across the globe that have filled the hearts of millions more who are not with us physically but in spirit.
This terrorist sought to tear our nation apart with an evil ideology that has torn the world apart. But, instead, we have shown that New Zealand is unbreakable. And that the world can see in us an example of love and unity. We are brokenhearted but we are not broken. We are alive. We are together. We are determined not to let anyone divide us.
The number of people killed is not extraordinary but the solidarity in New Zealand is extraordinary.
Families of the victims, your loved ones did not die in vain. Through them, the world will see the beauty of Islam and the beauty of our unity.
We are here in our hundreds and thousands unified for one purpose – that hate will be undone and love will redeem us.
Islamophobia kills. Islamophobia is real. It is a targeted campaign to influence people to dehumanise and irrationally fear Muslims. To fear what we wear, to fear the choice of food we eat, to fear the way we pray and to fear the way we practice our faith. We call upon governments around the world including New Zealand and the neighbouring countries to bring an end to hate speech and the politics of fear.
Last week’s event has proven as evidence to the entire world that terrorism has no colour, has no race and has no religion."
We need to step forward on hate speech. We need to deal decisively with offensive speech so that someone will not have to make this eulogy in Singapore. But if it happens, I hope that we will be able to respond in the same way that the New Zealanders have done. Thank you, Sir.
: Pursuant to Standing Order 44(2), the Motion to consider the Ministerial Statement on Restricting Hate Speech to Maintain Racial and Religious Harmony in Singapore lapses at the conclusion of debate.
: Senior Minister of State Mr Edwin Tong. I understand that you wish to make a clarification.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, with your leave, I wish to correct a factual error in my response speech during the Second Reading of the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment) Bill on 8 March 2019.
: Please proceed.
: In my speech, I referred to a 2008 extract from the Hansard. [
Please refer to "Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment) Bill", Official Report, 8 March 2019, Vol 94, Issue No 101, Second Reading Bills section
.] It has subsequently been brought to my attention that the excerpt I read was in fact from 2013. And I wish to correct this error for the record. Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker.
: Yes, correction noted. Leader of the House.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs how is the Government educating the public on the dangers of the consumption of psychoactive substances since there is some misconception that such drugs are less risky compared to hard drugs.
: As the Member pointed out, New Psychoactive Substances, also known as NPS, have been wrongly perceived by some people to be less addictive and less dangerous. Nothing could be further from the truth. These drugs are known to have adverse, irreversible physical and psychological effects.
The Central Narcotics Bureau (CNB) adopts a targeted approach to raise awareness about the harms of drugs. Since 2016, CNB has been driving an online campaign to strengthen the resilience of our youths against drug misinformation. They are provided with facts about the harms of drugs, including NPS, to counter the false information being propagated online that downplays the danger. CNB has enhanced its social media platforms to push out its messages. Many of the anti-drug videos posted online by CNB have been widely viewed. CNB will continue with these social media campaigns to feature bite-sized infographics and youth-centric content.
To address the increasingly liberal attitudes among youths, the National Council Against Drug Abuse, or NCADA, launched a "Feed Ambition. Fight Temptation" campaign in October 2018. Opinion leaders were roped in to engage youths in a mentorship programme, encouraging them to pursue their passion and stay away from drugs.
Youths are also given the opportunity to take greater ownership in the fight against drugs. In December last year, a new illustrated book "Captain Drug Buster versus Dr Wacko: The Final Showdown" was published. This was a collaboration with young illustrators. The book educates children on the harms of drug abuse, and serves as a resource for parents and educators to start the conversation on drugs with the young ones. We will make copies of the book widely available.
CNB has also been engaging NS commanders and educators on a sustained basis, to raise their awareness and understanding of Singapore’s drug control policies, as well as to rally their support for anti-drug advocacy.
A DrugFreeSG Community Roadshow was held in April 2018 to enhance outreach in the heartlands, targeting parents. Two more will be organised in 2019.
These are just some examples of CNB's preventive drug education efforts. We have seen encouraging results. We will need to continue countering the increasingly widespread portrayal in the popular media, of drug consumption as being a socially acceptable activity.
asked the Minister for Law whether the Ministry will consider reviewing the International Arbitration Act to provide for an avenue of appeal to our Singapore courts where it is alleged that there are errors of law in the award issued by an arbitral tribunal.
: Arbitration is a popular means of resolving commercial disputes. One of the reasons for its popularity is that it allows parties to have the autonomy to choose how their dispute should be resolved. This includes options like where the dispute should be heard and who should hear the dispute.
Singapore has over the years become a popular seat of international commercial arbitration. According to the White & Case and Queen Mary University of London's International Arbitration Survey in 2018, Singapore and the Singapore International Arbitration Centre (SIAC) were ranked as the third most preferred arbitration seat and arbitral institution in the world respectively, and first in Asia. The SIAC announced in its 2018 Annual Report that it has, for the second year running, received over 400 cases from parties in 65 jurisdictions. The total sum in dispute for all new case filings in 2018 was USD 7.06 billion (SGD 9.65 billion), an increase as compared with 2017.
1
The Ministry keeps track of developments in international best practices, to ensure that our framework stays responsive to users' evolving needs. Significant changes to the International Arbitration Act over the years include broadening the definition of an arbitration agreement and providing recourse against negative jurisdictional rulings by an arbitral tribunal. These changes reflect Singapore's commitment to support international commercial arbitration by enhancing the suite of options available for users, strengthening Singapore's position as the preferred destination for premier legal services.
As part of my Ministry's efforts to update the legal framework, my Ministry has noted that in certain other jurisdictions, parties to an arbitration may appeal against an award on a question of law. Currently, under our International Arbitration Act, parties who wish to challenge an arbitral award may apply to the High Court to set aside a final award. However, they may only do so on limited grounds relating to issues of jurisdiction, procedural irregularity, fraud, corruption or public policy. These grounds are as set out in Article 34(2) of the UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration and section 24 of the International Arbitration Act. There is no avenue for parties who wish to appeal to our Courts on a point of law in the award in international arbitrations.
My Ministry is currently reviewing the International Arbitration Act, taking into account the experience of other jurisdictions. One of the amendments we are considering will allow parties to appeal to the courts on a question of law arising out of an arbitration award, provided that they have agreed to contract in or opt in to this mechanism. Such appeals could be heard in the High Court, with safeguards to prevent frivolous or vexatious appeals.
Proponents of this option have said that it enhances party autonomy and injects greater flexibility for parties to opt for an appeal process to the courts if they wish to do so, while preserving certainty and finality.
My Ministry intends to conduct a public consultation on this, and other enhancements to the International Arbitration Act, and will release further details in due course.
asked the Minister for Law (a) what percentage of cases filed at the Small Claims Tribunal in the past three years are claims arising from tenancy-related disputes; (b) what proportion of such tenancy-related cases are filed by Singaporeans; and (c) whether there are plans to review existing laws to assist landlords and tenants in preventing or resolving tenancy disputes.
: The Small Claims Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear a wide variety of disputes. This includes claims relating to tenancy disputes arising from any contract for the rental of residential premises that does not exceed two years.
Based on statistics provided by the State Courts, an average of 10,414 cases were filed at the Small Claims Tribunals each year, from 2016 to 2018. Out of these cases, about nine percent on average were tenancy-related claims. The State Courts does not track the number of such cases which are filed by Singaporeans.
We recently amended the Small Claims Tribunals Act to allow the Tribunals to hear more claims in a quicker and more cost-effective manner, as well as to strengthen the Tribunal's case-management powers. One of the enhancements is to allow a Tribunal to order the remedy of delivery of vacant possession. This will allow a landlord to apply to seek that a tenant deliver vacant possession of rented premises in cases of unpaid rent. This will give the Tribunals a greater suite of options to assist landlord and tenants in resolving tenancy disputes.
asked the Minister for Manpower since the inception of CPF LIFE (a) how many CPF members have foregone their earned interest upon their demise; (b) what is the total amount of forgone interest deposited into the Lifelong Income Fund to date; and (c) whether members are made aware that the interest earned under CPF LIFE does not come under their estate and cannot be bequeathed should there be any unused annuity premium to be refunded.
: CPF LIFE has become a key pillar of our retirement system since it was introduced a decade ago in 2009. CPF LIFE protects Singaporeans against longevity risk, by providing them with a monthly retirement payout for life. This ensures that CPF members will not outlive their savings, even as life expectancy increases. Let me explain how it works.
Members join CPF LIFE today when they are ready to start their monthly payouts. They do so by committing a sum of CPF savings to a CPF LIFE plan. This sum is known as a 'premium', similar to how one would purchase an insurance cover. The interest that is earned on CPF LIFE premiums is pooled into the Lifelong Income Fund. This interest is up to 6% per year, comprising the base interest of 4% and 1% each from Extra Interest and Additional Extra Interest.
Each member's premium is used to provide him with monthly CPF LIFE payouts. However, when the premium is exhausted, the member will continue to receive monthly payouts by drawing on the pooled interest. For example, if a member commits $60,000 to CPF LIFE under the Standard plan and starts payouts at 65, his premium will be exhausted at the age of 79 and he will then continue to receive payouts from the pooled interest for as long as he lives.
In other words, through the pooling of interest, the member is effectively shielded from the risk that he will outlive his savings. In fact, Mr Png recognised this when he told this House in 2014 that CPF LIFE was a better scheme as it guaranteed payouts for life. But Mr Png is incorrect to describe the pooled interest as "forgone" because as I explained, every CPF LIFE member has a chance to draw on it once his own premiums have been fully paid out. He could even draw more from the interest pool than he put into it.
The pooled interest ultimately benefits the members of CPF LIFE. Moreover, because the interest earned is risk-free and the membership pool is very large, CPF LIFE members receive one of the highest payout per dollar of premium, compared to similar annuity products in the market.
A member and his loved ones will also always get back his CPF LIFE premium in full, in the form of monthly payouts and/or bequest, no matter what age he lives to. When a CPF LIFE member passes on, any unused premium will be distributed to the deceased member’s nominees. This is clearly communicated to members in the CPF LIFE application form and the yearly CPF LIFE payout statement.
CPF LIFE is a relatively young scheme. Members who currently receive CPF LIFE payouts have voluntarily opted into CPF LIFE at various ages. The first mandatory cohort of CPF LIFE members will only reach their payout eligibility age in 2023. However, in the long run, we expect a large majority of CPF LIFE members to draw payouts from the pooled interest. In any case, all members can be assured that their premiums are fully safeguarded for them and their loved ones. And what interest remains in the pool ultimately benefits members through lifelong payouts.
CPF Board has stepped up its efforts to help members make informed choices on their CPF LIFE plans. For example, the CPF LIFE estimator on the CPF website allows members to estimate their payouts and bequest amounts at different ages. The Board also offers a CPF Retirement Planning Service to all members reaching 55 years old, and their Payout Eligibility Age. This is a one-to-one session whereby a CPFB officer provides personalised guidance to the member, such as the various CPF LIFE plans they can choose from and the estimated payouts depending on the amount set aside. I hope that Members can encourage their residents to make full use of this Service and to approach CPF Board if they have queries about CPF LIFE.
asked the Minister for Communications and Information (a) whether the Ministry will make it mandatory for all employees in the Government and private sectors to attend courses relating to cybersecurity; and (b) beyond Internet separation policies, what else is being done to equip employees with the correct mindset towards cybersecurity.
: The Government is committed to build a strong cybersecurity culture in Singapore, both in the public service and the private sector. Training our people to be aware of cyber threats, and effectively detect and respond to malicious cyber activities, is key.
Within the public sector, the Government had introduced an IT security awareness programme in July 2018. It is mandatory for all public officers to complete the course by end of the year to educate all public officers of emerging cyber threats and the cybersecurity measures to take. There is also an annual Cyber Safe Cyber Ready Conference to enhance cyber awareness within the public service, and regular cyber exercises to sharpen the IT security incident response of our public sector agencies. These measures build up our public officers' understanding of cybersecurity.
Within the private sector, the Cyber Security Agency of Singapore (CSA) enhances cybersecurity awareness and practices through a variety of channels, such as talks, conferences and CSA's GoSafeOnline portal. CSA has also developed resources such as the Be Safe Online Handbook, launched in 2018, which explains what organisations should do to enhance their cyber defence capabilities such as using only authorised software, and updating systems regularly. CSA's "Cyber Tips 4 You" programme also educates the public on four essential cyber hygiene practices to adopt – to use a strong password and two-factor authentication, use anti-virus software, update software as soon as possible and to watch out for signs of phishing.
Additional requirements are placed on enterprises that own Critical Information Infrastructure (CII), which are computers or computer systems supporting the provision of our essential services. All CII owners must fulfil their legal obligations under the Cybersecurity Act, including establishing cybersecurity awareness programmes for their employees, contractors and vendors, and participating in cybersecurity exercises to validate their responses to cyber incidents.
Our cyber defences are only as strong as our weakest link. Every individual plays a critical role in safeguarding our cyberspace. The Government will continue to work with the private sector, individuals and the community to instil a strong cybersecurity culture, and strengthen Singapore's Digital Defence.
asked the Minister for Defence in respect of the two SAF personnel who were found dead in SAF camps in July and September 2018 respectively (a) what were the causes of the deaths; (b) whether the deaths were related to issues experienced in the course of service; and (c) prior to their deaths, whether their commanders or colleagues were aware of any problem or difficulty which had a bearing on their deaths.
: The deaths of two Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) servicemen – one a Regular serviceman and the other a full-time national serviceman – in July and September 2018 respectively on SAF premises were due to unnatural causes not related to service.
Police investigations to ascertain the causes and circumstances connected with these two deaths have been completed and submitted to the State Coroner. The State Coroner found that there was no evidence of foul play and that the deaths were deliberate acts of suicide. The State Coroner did not identify any contributory factors related to their commanders or colleagues, NS or work that could have led to the incident.
asked the Minister for Education (a) what is the number of MOE Kindergarten (MK) places that are presently available in primary schools; (b) how has been the take-up rate and whether there are enough places to meet current demand; (c) whether the current expansion plans are sufficient to meet future demand; and (d) whether there is a need to expedite plans to build more MK centres.
: Today, Ministry of Education (MOE) runs 24 MKs. The capacity for K1 intake for 2019 is around 2,700. Demand for MKs has been healthy, with about 85% of places taken up across all centres. The number of MKs will increase to around 50 by 2023.
MOE will continue to work closely with the Early Childhood Development Agency (ECDA) to monitor demand patterns across geographical regions, and ensure that there is an adequate supply of quality and affordable preschool services, through MKs, Anchor Operators and Partner Operators.
asked the Minister for Health whether the Ministry will review the ban against e-cigarettes as an alternative for long-term smokers to help them reduce the number of cigarettes smoked.
: The Ministry of Health (MOH) has banned Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems, including e-cigarettes for several reasons.
First, e-cigarettes are harmful to health. Their vapour contains toxic cancer-causing substances, as well as nicotine, which is highly addictive and has harmful effects on foetuses and brain development in adolescents.
Second, experience in other countries shows that there is a danger of e-cigarettes becoming entrenched in Singapore if we lift the ban. For example, an estimated 2.8 million adults in Great Britain used e-cigarettes in 2016, representing a four-fold increase from 700,000 users in 2012. In England, among 11 to 15 year-olds, one in 16 were current e-cigarette users in 2016, a 50% increase from 2014.
Third, e-cigarettes can be a gateway or 'starter product' which hooks youth on nicotine and leads them to cigarette use later. A systematic review of nine studies involving more than 17,000 youths in the United States found that e-cigarette users were three times more likely to become cigarette smokers compared to non-users. Another study among more than 19,000 Canadian youth, showed that e-cigarette users were twice as likely to go on to smoke cigarettes regularly. Other studies in England, Scotland and Poland similarly support this 'gateway effect'.
Nevertheless, we are open to companies registering a specific e-cigarette product under the Health Products Act as a therapeutic product for smoking cessation, if they are able to provide sufficient evidence that the product they are registering is safe and effective.
The current evidence on the role of e-cigarettes in aiding smoking cessation remains limited and mixed. Earlier this year, results from the first randomised controlled trial comparing e-cigarettes and Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT) was published. The study involved about 900 smokers with good motivation to quit. When combined with counselling, 18% of the smokers in the e-cigarette group quit smoking at twelve months post-intervention, compared to 10% of smokers from the NRT group. However, in the e-cigarette group, 80% of those who quit smoking continued to use e-cigarettes twelve months later. This means that overall, less than 4% of those in the e-cigarette group quit tobacco product use and their nicotine addiction totally. As there are concerns about the potential harmful effects of long-term use of e-cigarettes, this raises the question of whether they would have been better off quitting using other methods. In addition, more than 30% of those in the e-cigarette group who failed to quit ended up using both cigarettes and e-cigarettes. This leaves them worse off than before, as a recent large study has shown that dual users of cigarettes and e-cigarettes are exposed to more toxins than persons who only smoke cigarettes.
For smokers who wish to quit, there are already approved smoking cessation aids in Singapore which are safe and effective. Smoking cessation counselling, NRT and medications to treat nicotine dependence have all been shown to be effective in helping smokers to quit. There is also the HPB's Quitline for smokers to get more information and support for their quit journey. We will continue to monitor the evidence pertaining to the safety and efficacy of e-cigarettes as a smoking cessation product. Like all therapeutic products for smoking cessation, the onus is on the e-cigarette manufacturer to provide evidence of safety and efficacy. Thus far, none have done so.
asked the Minister for Law (a) how much freehold land is currently possessed by the Government; (b) what is the policy governing the sale of this freehold landbank to private property developers; and (c) how much freehold land has been sold to private developers in the past 10 years.
: Land held by the Government is released for sale to the private sector for development mainly via open tender through the Government Land Sales (GLS) programme. The lease tenure for land sold under the GLS programme does not exceed 99 years and is determined prior to launch.
asked the Minister for Manpower (a) how many seniors aged 65 and above currently receive payouts from Silver Support Scheme in addition to CPF monthly payouts; and (b) what is the average quantum of the combined monthly payouts.
: The objective of Silver Support is to provide retirement support to Singaporeans who had low incomes throughout life. About 20% of elderly Singaporeans aged 65 and above receive quarterly Silver Support payouts of $300 to $750, with those living in smaller flat types receiving higher payouts.
In 2018, about 51,000 elderly Singaporeans aged 65 and above received Silver Support payouts in addition to their CPF monthly payouts. Because it is targeted at those with low incomes throughout life, one of the eligibility criteria for Silver Support is low total CPF contributions; understandably, all Silver Support recipients would therefore have low monthly CPF payouts. Many of these members could also have made lump sum withdrawals which now supplement their current payouts. The combined monthly payouts may therefore not be the only sources of retirement income for these members. Nevertheless, for those living in 1- and 2-room HDB flats, the median combined payout is $500 per month, whereas for those in 5-room flats, the median combined payout is $350 per month. For reference, a 65-year-old member who had set aside the Basic Retirement Sum and started his CPF payouts this year would receive $520 per month.
On top of their Silver Support and CPF payouts, seniors may receive benefits from the Pioneer and Merdeka Generation Packages, annual GST Vouchers, concessions on Public Transport and caregiver support schemes. Those living in public housing may also receive subsidised rental or utility rebates. Elderly Singaporeans who need additional financial support can apply for ComCare and other assistance schemes.
asked the Minister for National Development whether the current policy of imposing a household income ceiling on Singapore citizens intending to purchase BTO flats may be reviewed to provide some flexibility to households who have unique family circumstances such as the need to take care of mentally disabled family members that require these families to incur higher expenditures or put aside money to deal with the future needs of the disabled family members.
: The Housing & Development Board (HDB) is committed to helping Singaporeans, particularly first-timers and lower to middle-income families, to own a home. The income ceiling helps to ensure that housing subsidies are prioritised for those who need them most.
The current income ceiling of $12,000 covers the majority of Singaporeans. Nonetheless, for families who exceed the income ceiling but face difficulties such as heavy financial commitments to support family members' medical and living expenses, HDB will review these cases to see how best we can assist them.
In addition, households earning more than $12,000 a month can purchase a flat from the HDB resale market, where there is no income ceiling restriction.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) what are the usual causes of cracks on the inside and outside of the walls of HDB flats; (b) what measures does the Ministry take to mitigate these causes; and (c) how often are inspections and maintenance works conducted.
: Cracks observed on internal and external walls are usually plaster or skim coat cracks. They are primarily caused by the natural expansion and contraction of building materials, vibration from nearby construction works or renovation activities when residents first move in to their flat. They are non-structural and will not affect the structural integrity of the building.
Over the years, HDB has undertaken several steps to reduce the incidence of wall cracks. First, all HDB flats are inspected at the end of construction to ensure that there are no visible cracks on their internal and external walls before they are handed over to residents and Town Councils. Second, HDB's adoption of precast technology in the mid-1980s has reduced the need for plastering. Instead, skim coats are used, which are less susceptible to cracks. Third, to reduce the occurrence of cracks at joints between pre-cast panels, HDB has also improved the design and detailing of the joints over the years. Finally, new methods of construction such as large panel precast elements and prefabricated prefinished volumetric construction have reduced
the number of joints where cracks can occur.
The Member has also asked about the inspection and maintenance of wall cracks.
(a) For cracks on internal walls, during the 1-year Defects Liability Period (DLP) for new flats, flat owners can feedback on cracks observed to their precinct’s Building Service Centre and they will be rectified accordingly. After the 1-year DLP, flat owners are responsible for the inspection and maintenance of the interior of their flats.
(b) For cracks on the external walls of HDB blocks, Town Councils are responsible. They conduct regular inspections on the external façade wall and, where necessary, they will engage a Professional Engineer to follow up on any repairs that are required. Nonetheless, to supplement this, HDB conducts annual audit inspections of selected blocks, with a focus on buildings with more facade elements.
asked the Minister for Social and Family Development (a) how many applications for personal protection orders (PPOs) have been made in the last three years; (b) how many orders have been (i) issued and (ii) withdrawn or dismissed; (c) what are the main reasons for the withdrawal or dismissal; and (d) whether there is a plan to streamline the process for the application of PPOs.
: From 2016 to 2018, the Family Justice Courts (FJC) have received a yearly average of about 2,700 applications under the Women's Charter for Personal Protection Orders (PPO) against a family member. In the same period, a yearly average of 1,200 PPOs was issued. The rest of the applications were withdrawn, dismissed, or struck out.
A PPO may not be granted for various reasons. For example, the Court may dismiss the application if it is not satisfied on a balance of probabilities that family violence has been committed and that a PPO is necessary. An applicant may also withdraw the application, but only with the permission of the Court. This ensures that the applicant is not coerced into doing so.
The Ministry of Social and Family Development and FJC work closely to ensure that the PPO application process is simple and accessible. Over the years, we have increased the number of ways to submit an application. An application can be initiated online for greater convenience. An applicant may also walk into the FJC or any of the three Family Violence Specialist Centres, where staff are available to guide the applicant.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources whether the Ministry will consider instituting a national water rationing day as part of our overall national efforts to get the population to use water prudently.
: I thank the Member for his call for all Singaporeans to use water prudently. While we continue to plan ahead and invest in infrastructure and R&D to ensure our water security, we must sustain our push for water conservation. The costly but necessary investments in our water infrastructure will be for naught if we do not manage our water demand. We need to continue to work hard to encourage all Singaporeans to use water prudently.
We believe that such good habits are best cultivated from young. Since 2016, the Public Utilities Board (PUB) has worked with schools to organise Water Rationing Exercises in the month of March, as part of Singapore World Water Day. This year, approximately 47,000 students from 116 schools, ranging from pre-schools to tertiary institutions, participated in these exercises. This is the largest number of participating schools to date. In addition, PUB worked with the Ministry of Education to incorporate water conservation topics in the curriculum. These help to reinforce the value of water amongst the students and the need to "Make Every Drop Count".
For our larger community, PUB takes a multi-pronged approach to encourage water conservation and empower individuals to better manage their water usage. PUB has been carrying out Automated Meter Reading trials, most recently in Punggol and Yuhua. As part of the trials, residents were able to access their water consumption data in near real-time through a mobile app, as well as participate in various water conservation themed games. These have helped to encourage the residents to change their water usage behaviour and adopt good water-saving habits.
As the trials have shown encouraging results so far, PUB is exploring how this system can be progressively implemented nation-wide.
PUB has also put in place a mandatory water efficiency labelling scheme, or MWELS, to help consumers make more informed purchasing decisions. We have set minimum water efficiency standards for water fittings and appliances. To further drive the use of more efficient water fittings under the MWELS, the minimum efficiency standards for all fittings will be further raised to 2-ticks from today, 1 April 2019.
The responsibility of water conservation does not fall on households alone. Businesses must also play a part. For the non-domestic sector, large water users are required to prepare and submit Water Efficiency Management Plans, which help them to better understand their water usage and identify ways to enhance their water efficiency. PUB supports businesses implementing water-efficient projects through the Water Efficiency Fund. PUB is currently working with the Singapore Environment Council to develop a Green Labelling Scheme for commercial dishwashers, commercial washer extractors and high pressure jet machines in Singapore, to encourage businesses such as hotels, F&B outlets and town councils to purchase water efficient equipment for their business operations.
Water is a scarce resource that should not be taken for granted. I urge everyone to do our part to use water wisely, so that we can continue to enjoy it for years to come.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) over the last two years, how many serious accidents have there been involving personal mobility devices; and (b) whether there are cases where the victims have been unable to claim for their treatment and left in debt.
: In 2017 and 2018, there were 228 reported accidents involving personal mobility devices (PMDs) on public paths. Of these accidents, there were 196 cases with reported injuries, out of which one was a fatal accident involving a PMD rider who self-skidded and subsequently succumbed to his injuries. 32 other reported cases involved major injuries such as concussions or fractures.
We do not have information on the cases where victims are unable to claim their treatment costs from the responsible party and are left in debt.
To prevent accidents, deter reckless behaviour and improve active mobility safety, the Land Transport Authority (LTA) has implemented a registration regime for motorised PMDs and lowered the speed limits on footpaths.
LTA complements these regulations with strict enforcement to ensure compliance. Individuals caught riding recklessly can be liable upon conviction to a fine up to $5,000 and/or jail up to six months. Those involved in accidents can also be charged for causing hurt or grievous hurt through a rash or negligent act and be liable for fines up to $10,000 and jail terms of up to four years. Several PMD riders have been charged in court with custodial sentences meted out.
LTA also conducts extensive publicity and educational efforts to improve awareness and understanding of the regulations and to develop a safe riding culture.
Victims injured in active mobility accidents may obtain compensation from the responsible party through private settlement, undertaking mediation with the Singapore Mediation Centre or Law Society of Singapore, or filing a civil suit in the State Courts. If the responsible party is convicted for causing hurt by a rash or negligent act under the Penal Code, the Court may order compensation to be paid to the victim.
The Active Mobility Advisory Panel and LTA strongly encourage all active mobility device users to purchase third-party liability insurance to protect themselves against third-party claims in the event of an accident. This will also facilitate claims for treatment costs by victims. LTA has announced that motorised PMD-sharing licensees would be required to procure and maintain third-party liability insurance. LTA is also working with companies such as food delivery companies on the purchase of third-party insurance for their delivery riders.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) when was the previous bus stop bench replacement exercise done and how much was spent; (b) when is the current bench replacement exercise expected to end; and (c) how long are these new benches expected to last.
: The replacement of bus shelter benches is an ongoing effort. Bus shelter benches are generally replaced when bus shelters are upgraded to better serve commuter needs, when bus shelters need to be relocated or when the benches are no longer in working condition.
Over the past five years, around 500 benches were replaced at a cost of around $500 to $1,500 per bench, excluding installation costs. The benches at about 2,300 bus shelters which are at least 15 years old are progressively being replaced by 2020. The new benches come with wider seats and arm rests and are expected to last at least 20 years.
asked the Minister for Health whether consideration can be made to extend the HPV vaccination programme and the one-off catch-up programme to male students as well.
: The Ministry of Health (MOH), consults the Expert Committee on Immunisation and takes into account criteria such as the disease burden in Singapore, the need for herd immunity as protection against outbreaks of potentially serious diseases, and the clinical and cost-effectiveness of the vaccine, when including vaccines in the national schedules and school-based vaccination programmes. The aim is to prevent diseases with significant public health burden, by encouraging high vaccination take-up rates.
The school-based HPV vaccination programme for female students aims to prevent cervical cancer, which is caused by HPV. Cervical cancer is the tenth most common cancer and eighth most common cause of cancer death among females in Singapore. We have assessed that HPV vaccination for females is a cost-effective strategy for preventing cervical cancer.
While HPV vaccination also confers protection against genital warts as well as other cancers, such as anal cancer, which are applicable to males, males are not at risk for cervical cancer. Genital warts are a much less serious problem compared to cervical cancer, and the incidence of anal cancer is much lower than cervical cancer in Singapore. HPV vaccination for males is therefore not part of the Committee’s current recommendations.
MOH will continue to monitor the situation, and will review our policy on HPV vaccination for males as and when new developments and evidence emerge on its clinical and cost effectiveness.
asked the Minister for Health (a) what is the current average waiting time at the polyclinics; (b) how has the online appointment system helped to reduce the waiting time; and (c) how can the elderly or those who are less IT-savvy be assisted to use the online system especially if the visit is unplanned and necessitated by sudden ailment.
: In 2018, the median waiting time for consultation across all polyclinics was 11 minutes, an improvement from 14 minutes in 2017.
Patients with chronic conditions who require regular follow-ups with the polyclinics can schedule their next appointments at the appointment counters after their clinic visits. Individuals requiring unplanned visits necessitated by sudden ailments, can also book an appointment on the same day through online platforms such as HealthHub and the polyclinics' online appointment systems. Alternatively, patients can also call the polyclinics' contact centres to schedule an appointment. With an appointment, individuals would only have to arrive at the polyclinic 15 minutes before their appointment time.
As we move towards digital platforms, we are mindful that there may be individuals who are unable to use the online systems, including some seniors. For those who walk in without an appointment, there will continue to be healthcare assistants on-site to assist individuals with the registration process as well as help teach them to use online platforms.
asked the Minister for Manpower whether the Ministry will review the eligibility criteria of Dependant's Passes for children by considering the combined household income if both parents are working on employment or S-passes.
: Singapore is not in a position to support all employment pass or S-pass holders who wish to have their dependants with them here. Another important consideration is the sponsor's ability to afford the family's cost of living in Singapore. As there is no assurance that both parents will have continued employment in Singapore, the fixed monthly salary of the main pass holder is a more stable indicator for assessing the eligibility of the child to be granted a dependant's pass. We have no plans to review this approach.
asked the Minister for National Development how can support be given to genuine HDB upgraders who wish to purchase a private property for owner occupation but find themselves caught in transitional issues such as the hefty Additional Buyer's Stamp Duty.
: The Additional Buyer's Stamp Duty, or ABSD, is intended to moderate demand for private residential properties. Any changes to the ABSD regime will have an impact on the property market. So we cannot look at this matter in isolation. The government continues to monitor the property market closely, and will take the necessary measures to ensure a stable property market, with prices moving in line with economic fundamentals. This will ultimately benefit more Singaporeans, including HDB upgraders.
asked the Prime Minister based on the latest update to the Registers of Electors (a) which GRC has the highest increase in the number of eligible voters; and (b) what is the increase in the number of eligible voters for each GRC and SMC.
: Based on the Registers of Electors as at 1 February 2019, the GRC with the largest increase in number of electors is Pasir Ris-Punggol.
The increase in the number of eligible voters for each GRC and SMC is shown in the table below:
asked the Prime Minister for each year in 2017 and 2018 (a) how many Singapore residents are listed under "Others" in the ethnic category of official documents such as birth certificates and NRICs; (b) what are all the ethnicities and their numbers that make up "Others"; and (c) what is the percentage for each of the categories in the Chinese-Malay-Indian-Others (CMIO) model.
: Table 1 below shows the ethnic composition of the Singapore citizen population in 2017 and 2018.
Table 2 below shows the number of Singapore citizens listed under the "Others" ethnic category in 2017 and 2018.
Table 3 below shows the breakdown of the six prevalent ethnicities in the citizen population under "Others", based on the latest available data from the General Household Survey of 2015.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) what is the Ministry's evaluation framework and process in deciding whether to ground a particular model of aircraft; and (b) how are aircraft types regularly reviewed before they are allowed to operate in Singapore.
: The Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore (CAAS) evaluates an aircraft type for operation to Singapore based on an established framework that is in accordance with international regulations and processes. It includes assessments of the aircraft design, the maturity of the technologies used, and the resolution of all known safety issues with the aircraft. The evaluation is carried out by a multi-disciplinary team of CAAS officers, including engineers and officers with pilot qualifications.
After an aircraft is approved for operation to Singapore, CAAS continues to review the reliability and airworthiness of in-service aircraft through regular inspections, monitoring of technical defects and incidents, and review of safety information provided by aircraft manufacturers, airline operators and counterpart regulatory authorities.
CAAS will ground an aircraft type if it determines that the continued operation of the aircraft presents a safety risk.
asked the Minister for Transport whether the current Productivity Extraction Factor for the Fare Revision Framework takes into consideration operating profits from retail operations of the public transport operators.
: The Productivity Extraction factor in the fare formula is designed to allow the productivity gains of the public transport operators (PTOs) to be shared with commuters through lower fare adjustments. Productivity gains are measured in terms of the change in value-add per employee, and takes into consideration the PTOs' operating profits, including the profits from their retail operations.
asked the Minister for Transport whether he can update the House on the progress and timeline for installing 2,000 electric vehicle charging points across Singapore.
: The BlueSG electric car-sharing programme is jointly supported by the Land Transport Authority (LTA) and the Economic Development Board (EDB). Under this programme, BlueSG has committed to roll out a total of 500 charging stations equipped with 2,000 charging points nationwide by end-2020. To date, BlueSG has installed 178 charging stations and 703 charging points.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs (a) what is the number of business e-mail compromise scams in the last five years; (b) what have been the financial losses in total and how much has been recovered; and (c) whether there are plans to better educate potential victims of such business e-mail compromise scams.
: The number of business e-mail impersonation scams has increased over the past five years, from 98 cases in 2014 to 378 cases in 2018.
The amount cheated has increased in tandem, from about $11 million in 2014 to about $57 million in 2018. The Police do not track the amount of money recovered from scams. Whenever monies are recovered, Police will apply to the Courts to have them returned to the rightful owners. These scams are usually conducted by overseas criminal syndicates, and thus it is not easy to recover the monies.
The Police have been working with stakeholders, such as the Singapore Business Federation, Singapore International Chamber of Commerce, Institute of Singapore Chartered Accountants, and the Accounting and Corporate Regulatory Authority to step up public education on business e-mail impersonation scams. These efforts include sending out advisories in email broadcasts to members, disseminating pamphlets during outreach events, and posting of advisories on their web portals and social media platforms. The Police have also sent out advisory messages to about 80,000 individual businesses.
The Police have also set up an Anti-Scam Helpline (1800-722-6688) and the www.scamalert.sg website. Businesses and members of the public are encouraged to visit the website to learn about the various types of scam and the steps to take to avoid becoming a victim.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs (a) what regulations or guidelines are in place to ensure that law enforcement agencies and the media do not release or publish prejudicial information about suspects that can undermine due process in ongoing criminal investigations and proceedings; and (b) whether the prior criminal history and out-of-court records of the suspect who allegedly uploaded videos of the Prime Minister's son in March 2019 have been divulged to the media by the police or other public agency or official and, if so, why.
: Ms Lim's questions refer to the incident where Mr Li Yipeng was taken for a ride on 15 March 2019.
The man was driving a private, rented car. The car was not licensed for ride-sharing. Five months earlier, in November 2018, Grab had terminated the man's contract for driving a private hire car without proper decals and also for suspected touting.
Since the man did not have a car licensed to pick up passengers, he could not, (amongst other things), pick up passengers from the roadside.
The man recognised Mr Li as the Prime Minister's son. He picked up Mr Li who was waiting for a hail taxi. Mr Li is a vulnerable person. It is public knowledge that Mr Li has Asperger's syndrome, a mild form of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) characterised by significant difficulties in social interaction and in non-verbal communication. This is compounded by Mr Li's albinism, which results in his having very poor eyesight.
The driver then filmed his interactions with Mr Li using his handphone, apparently while driving, and subsequently circulated the videos. In the confined setting of his car, the man can be heard (in a video), repeatedly asking Mr Li to confirm his identity, residential address and security arrangements. Leaving aside Mr Li's background, it is very troubling when an individual picks up any vulnerable person, whether adult or child, and puts that person in such a situation. I am sure the Member, like most people, will be deeply concerned by what happened. The man put Mr Li in an uncomfortable situation, apparently exploited the situation, filmed it, and then circulated it.
The videos came to the Police's attention. The man’s conduct in the videos showed, prima facie, infractions of the law.
Police began investigations immediately. In addition to the infractions, the Police were concerned from the security perspective as well, for a number of reasons. The man made repeated references to Rochalie Drive, and pressed Mr Li on the security arrangements at PM's home. The questions he asked showed that he already knew Mr Li's identity.
The man had picked up Mr Li without possessing a street hailing licence, and he had criminal antecedents:
(a) A conviction in 2014 for taking a vehicle without owner’s consent under the Road Traffic Act;
(b) With the offence of Driving a Motor Vehicle without Insurance in respect to Third-Party Risks under the Motor Vehicles (Third-Party Risks and Compensation) Act taken into consideration;
(c) A warning for theft in dwelling in 2002; and,
(d) A report made against him for criminal intimidation in 2014.
When asked by the media, the Police confirmed these investigations. The Minister for Home Affairs directed the Police to state the man's antecedents, without disclosing his name.
It was in the public interest for the Police to give a fuller explanation and background why they were investigating the matter. If the Police did not set out their security concerns, the public may not grasp why the Police were investigating the matter, and may even misunderstand the Police's actions. It was important to provide the public relevant and specific facts, in order to maintain public confidence in the Police Force.
The Member has also asked about Rules and Guidelines on what information can be published. Police decisions on what information to disclose are guided by existing legal requirements.
With the proliferation of social media, public agencies will from time to time need to release information faster than used to be the case. It may not always be possible in all cases to wait for a trial to commence or be concluded, a process which may take weeks or months, before releasing relevant facts to the public. When the Police assess that it is necessary to release information earlier, they will do so, while being careful not to prejudice any investigations or legal proceedings that may follow.
asked the Minister for Law in the recent case of the Singapore Medical Council appealing against its disciplinary tribunal's sentence, how did the memo containing confidential health information written by Dr Soo Shuenn Chiang for a patient, falsely obtained by the patient's brother posing as the patient's husband, come to be accepted by the court for the patient's brother to obtain a personal protection order against the patient.
: The Member asks about why the Court accepted a document in evidence.
The Courts make their decisions independently. We will know the reasons for a decision, if they give the reasons in a judgment.
There was also no conclusion or finding made by the Singapore Medical Council Disciplinary Tribunal (DT) as to whether the memorandum was admitted into evidence or relied on by the court in granting the Personal Protection Order (PPO). The DT observed that there was "no clear evidence" that the PPO had been granted because of the disclosure of the memorandum. At the very most, the facts showed that the memorandum had been produced in the application for a PPO (see Singapore Medical Council v Dr Soo Shuen Chiang
[2018] SMCDT 11 at [25]).
PPO proceedings are held in the Family Justice Courts (FJC). Proceedings in FJC are conducted in camera. Likewise in this case. In addition, FJC had not issued its grounds of decision. There is thus no appeal filed by either party to the PPO proceedings. Therefore, there are no publicly-known facts as to whether the memorandum was indeed admitted into evidence or relied on by FJC.
The Singapore Medical Council has taken steps to pursue an appeal against the DT's decision. On appeal, the Court could possibly look into the surrounding facts, including the circumstances in which the memorandum was procured. Further, whether the memorandum was accepted by FJC, and the weight FJC placed on it in granting the PPO are issues that may also potentially arise on appeal.
asked the Minister for Health since the CHAS card was first introduced, how many residents have visited GP clinics, by number and percentage of increase, using the CHAS card for subsidised medical treatment instead of visiting the polyclinics.
: The Community Health Assist Scheme (CHAS) was introduced in 2012. It provides subsidies for Singapore Citizens who are CHAS and/or Pioneer Generation (PG) cardholders and, in future, Merdeka Generation (MG) cardholders, for medical and dental care at participating private General Practitioner (GP) and dental clinics.
Since the scheme's introduction, the number of cardholders who benefitted from CHAS medical subsidies in a given year increased by nine times, from about 60,000 in 2012 to about 550,000 in 2018.
asked the Minister for Health how is the Ministry working with doctors and healthcare staff to prevent healthcare insurance fraud.
: MOH takes a serious view of any attempts to defraud the healthcare system at the expense of Singaporeans. Fraudulent behaviour, such as inappropriate patient referrals for financial gains and making false claims for services, is wrong and unethical. It also raises the overall costs of healthcare in Singapore, leading to Singaporeans paying more for their healthcare services and insurance plans.
Various stakeholders have a part to play in combating healthcare insurance fraud. MOH monitors the landscape of MediShield Life and Integrated Shield Plan (IP) claims, and works with IP insurers to identify anomalous trends. For cases where criminal offences are suspected, MOH and insurers will refer them to the police for further investigation.
The Singapore Medical Council (SMC) provides guidance to doctors through the Ethical Code and Ethical Guidelines (ECEG) on ethical practice and professional standards to ensure the wellbeing of patients. In particular, the ECEG prohibits doctors from letting business or financial considerations influence the objectivity of their clinical judgement in their management of patients. Doctors who contravene the ECEG can be subject to disciplinary action by SMC.
Doctors, healthcare staff, patients, insurance providers, financial advisors and members of the public should lodge a complaint to MOH, SMC or the police if they suspect any fraudulent behaviour, or receive any suspicious propositions in relation to their healthcare services or health insurance claims.
asked the Minister for Health for the senior care industry (a) what is the percentage of local workers; and (b) what are the plans to attract more locals.
: Based on data reported by MOH-subvented service providers in 2018, there were 12,000 workers working in the Long Term Care (LTC) sector
1
, of which about 40% are locals.
We have been enhancing the attractiveness of LTC jobs to locals by (a) raising awareness and interest in job opportunities within the sector, (b) providing training and development opportunities, and (c) increasing salary competitiveness.
For example, the Agency for Integrated Care (AIC) works with LTC providers and recruitment partners like Workforce Singapore (WSG) and Employment and Employability Institute (e2i) to facilitate local employment and raise awareness of job opportunities in the LTC sector. In 2018, more than 1,000 locals have joined the LTC sector through various recruitment efforts.
MOH and AIC also support LTC providers in staff training and development. For example, training for newly hired local support care staff
2
can be funded under the Community Care Traineeship Programme (CCTP) so they can be equipped with requisite skills to perform in their new roles. Providers are also eligible for on-the-job training support of up to $10,000 per local support staff recruited to facilitate mentoring, supervision and development of new hires. Local staff may apply for sponsorship through the Community Care Manpower Development Award (CCMDA) to pursue advance training in skills relevant to their work.
Lastly, to increase local salary competitiveness, MOH works with employers to review salaries of workers regularly to ensure that they are adequately recognised for their efforts. Between 2012 and 2017, MOH had provided funding support to raise wages of workers across participating providers which saw a 30% increase in aggregate over this period.
Going forward, we will continue to step up our efforts to attract locals to this sector.
asked the Minister for Health for each year from 2015 to 2018 (a) how many Singaporeans and PRs paid more than $100 in cash after taking into account subsidies, MediShield Life and MediSave deductions arising from all subsidised hospitalisations; and (b) out of all these aforesaid subsidised hospitalisations, what was the average amount paid by each patient in cash.
: Between 2015 to 2017, the latest year with available data, about eight in 10 subsidised hospitalisation bills were paid with $100 or less in cash.
As bill sizes vary depending significantly on the complexity of the treatment and length of stay, a median rather than an average is a more meaningful reflection of the cash payments for the remaining bills. As shown at Table 1, the median cash payment for these bills is about $500. There has been a reduction in the figure from 2015 to 2017 with the introduction of MediShield Life.
We will continue to review our healthcare financing framework regularly. No Singaporean will be denied appropriate healthcare because of affordability reasons. Singaporeans who have difficulty coping with their medical bills can apply through medical social workers in public healthcare institutions for additional MediFund support.
asked the Minister for Communications and Information (a) since the Personal Data Protection Commission started receiving complaints in 2014, how many complaints has it referred for alternative dispute resolution under section 27(1) and (2) of the Personal Data Protection Act; and (b) of the complaints sent for such alternative dispute resolution, how many resulted in complainants receiving settlement payments or other redress.
: Since 2014, PDPC successfully facilitated a resolution between the complainant and the relevant organisation in 866 instances. In addition, one case was sent to mediation with the mutual consent of both parties. The settlement terms are confidential.
asked the Minister for Communications and Information with regard to the porting of telephone numbers (a) what is the time limit for telecommunications companies to complete the process; and (b) how should the costs of delays be distributed.
: The timeframe for telephone number porting depends on the telephony service and type of customer involved.
Operators are required to complete the porting of mobile telephone numbers within one working day. Operators are also required to complete fixed-line number porting for consumers within five working days.
A longer timeframe may apply in some instances. For example, where consumers are porting their fixed-line telephone number while also switching their
fibre broadband provider, it would take at least an additional three working days for the incoming provider to activate fibre services before the number porting process can begin.
If the number porting process takes longer than expected, the subscriber still receives services from the outgoing operator before the number is ported, and hence is charged fees under his or her contract. Subscribers who are aggrieved can nevertheless approach the relevant operator for recourse, including for an adjustment or waiver of the bill. The Info-communications Media Development Authority (IMDA) will also step in to safeguard the consumer interest where necessary.
asked the Minister for Communications and Information whether the Ministry has plans to better regulate the installation and access to CCTVs installed in public and private premises in the wake of the recent outcry of CCTVs in a private gym.
: The Police Licensing and Regulatory Department requires any person who provides CCTV installation or maintenance as a service to have a Security Service Provider licence under the Private Security Industry Act. These licensees must undergo security screening to ensure they are fit and proper persons to provide security services.
In addition, under the Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA), organisations are required to notify individuals of the purpose and obtain their consent to collect, use or disclose their personal data, including those captured by CCTV recordings. Also, organisations are required to protect personal data in their possession or control by making reasonable security arrangements.
The Personal Data Protection Commission (PDPC) has issued advisory guidelines to help organisations deploying CCTVs comply with the PDPA. The advisory guidelines provide examples of good practices, such as placing notices at points of entry to a building or prominent locations in a venue, where individuals are able to read the notices prior to the collection of their personal data by CCTVs.
Organisations that install CCTVs but fail to notify or obtain consent from an individual for the collection of his/her personal data, or fail to protect such personal data, are liable for breaching the PDPA. The PDPC will investigate and take enforcement action for breaches, which include issuing directions and imposing financial penalties.
asked the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth (a) why is there an allocation of only five busking sites to each successful applicant of a Busking Card; and (b) whether the Ministry plans to review and expand the number of (i) designated busking sites (ii) audition cycles per year and (iii) audition slots available under each audition cycle.
17
asked the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth for each year in the past five years (a) how many applications for a Busking Card has the Ministry received; (b) how many applications have been rejected; (c) what are the top three reasons for rejecting an application; and (d) in how many audition cycles are the audition slots fully taken up.
18
asked the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth (a) what are the factors considered when deciding which five busking locations are to be allocated to a busker apart from the buskers' provided list of eight interested locations; and (b) for each designated busking location, what are the numbers of applicants and successful applicants in the past year.
: The Busking Scheme was introduced in 1997 to support the Government's efforts to enhance Singapore's vibrancy, and provide opportunities for Singaporeans to enjoy the arts in everyday spaces from our city centre to our neighbourhoods.
Over the past five years, NAC has received an average of around 300 busking applications each year for a Letter of Endorsement. To accommodate greater interest in the Busking Scheme, the capacity of the quarterly auditions has been gradually increased. About 80% of the 600 slots available were utilised last year, and around one in two applicants were successful in obtaining a Letter of Endorsement.
In their audition, buskers are assessed by a panel of three arts professionals on their: (i) competency and skill in performance; (ii) engagement with the audience; (iii) expressiveness and confidence; and (iv) innovation and originality.
If they are successful, they will be allocated a number of busking sites so that there is a good spread of buskers across different locations in Singapore, and prevents overcrowding in certain spots which may cause dis-amenities such as loud noise and threat to safety. Over 90% of buskers are allocated at least one of their preferred locations. Currently, there are a total of around 300 buskers who have been given approval to busk at over 80 locations.
asked the Minister for Trade and Industry what has been the amount of medical tourism receipts for each year from 2015 to 2018.
: My Ministry and agencies do not have comprehensive data on the amount of medical expenditure incurred by overseas visitors in Singapore. Medical tourism is not part of our tourism strategy.
asked the Minister for National Development whether priority can be given to senior citizens who wish to apply for 2-room Flexi flats together with their peers as a group application as they wish to be neighbours with each other.
: HDB sets aside a high proportion of the public flat supply of 2-room Flexi flats for elderly applicants aged 55 and above. The Build-To-Order application rates for elderly applicants have been stable at below two times the flat supply set aside for them, with almost all elderly applicants invited to book a flat.
Elderly applicants can also make use of the Senior Priority Scheme (SPS) to improve their chances when they apply for a two-room Flexi flat near their current home or their married child. So eligible seniors can apply under the SPS to be neighbours with one another in a new project.
asked the Minister for National Development whether BCA, in determining the productivity scoring for public sector construction project tenders under the Price Quality Method framework of tender evaluation, can revise the Technology Adoption Index and Workforce Development Index which are now predicated solely on how much the tenderers tap on the Construction Productivity and Capability Fund so as to ensure tenderers only tap on the Fund when they have a need to do so.
: Under the Price Quality Method framework, the assessed productivity of the contractor accounts for 10% of the overall evaluation score. A major part of this assessment is based on the contractor's track record in employing productive construction methods in past projects. In addition, a small weightage is assigned to the contractors' take-up of the relevant schemes under the Construction Productivity and Capability Fund (CPCF), which serves as a proxy for their investments in productivity improvements. BCA will continue to review and update the evaluation criteria, including the use of other suitable indicators.
asked the Minister for National Development whether the Fresh Start Housing Scheme, which currently covers the purchase of short-lease 2-room flexi flats, may be extended to allow persons with bigger families such as those with three or more children to purchase bigger flats on short-term leases.
: HDB offers 2-room Flexi flats on shorter leases under the Fresh Start Housing Scheme to make home ownership more affordable for second-timer families with young children who are living in public rental flats. Many of these families already face challenges in affording the 2-room Flexi flats, even with the shorter leases and the Fresh Start Housing Grant. Hence, it would be even more difficult for them to purchase a bigger flat. We want to encourage home ownership for these families, but this has to be done in a sustainable way without overstretching their finances.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) whether the redevelopment plan for the HDB flats at Dakota Crescent has been finalised; and (b) whether HDB can share its plans for the six HDB blocks within Dakota Crescent that are being retained.
: Dakota Crescent estate will be redeveloped for public housing. The plans and design are being worked out, and more details will be shared when ready.
Agencies are also in active discussion with potential community users on the usage of the six former Singapore Improvement Trust (SIT) blocks that will be retained. The ground level could be activated for community uses, while the upper storeys could be used for accommodation, for example as a students' hostel. Interested parties are conducting feasibility studies on the suitability of these blocks. We will share more information with stakeholders after these studies are completed.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) what is the current number of applicants in the waiting list for season parking at the heavy vehicle parking lots at Bukit Batok East Avenue 2 and Bukit Batok Road (Jurong Road); (b) what is the average waiting period for applicants applying for lots at the abovementioned spaces before they successfully obtain season parking; and (c) what are the closest alternative parking areas to the abovementioned parking lots and how far away are those spaces.
: As of March 2019, there were 268 and 116 applicants on the wait lists for the heavy vehicle parks at Batok East Avenue 2 and Bukit Batok (Jurong Road) respectively. The waiting time will vary depending on how many drivers give up their parking spaces, the length of waitlist, and the number of spaces for each parking place.
However, there are vacant heavy vehicle parking spaces in the area. Based on the information on the Land Transport Authority (LTA)’s one-motoring website, as of February 2019, there were 353 available lots in Bukit Batok, Clementi, Jurong East and Jurong West. The nearest available lots are about 2 km away.
asked the Minister for National Development as a percentage of the land area of Singapore, what is the total area used respectively for (i) public housing (ii) private housing (iii) industrial land and (iv) parks, nature reserves and water catchment.
: Of the total land area of Singapore, approximately (i) 8% is used for public housing; (ii) 7% is used for private housing, largely in areas zoned for low-rise and low-density land use; (iii) 13% is used for industry; and (iv) 14% is used for parks, nature reserves, nature areas and waterbodies.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources with regard to the methane fumes incident at Pasir Gudang (a) what is the environmental impact on Singapore; (b) whether there is an adverse impact on our fisheries; and (c) what are the early detection systems put in place to alert Singaporeans.
: According to media reports, since 7 March 2019, more than 3,000 Johoreans fell ill as a result of illegal dumping of chemical waste into Sungai Kim Kim, a river in Pasir Gudang. Hazardous fumes caused severe symptoms including nausea, shortness of breath and vomiting. Thousands needed immediate medical attention and many, including children, were admitted to hospitals for treatment. All 111 schools in the Pasir Gudang district were closed on 13 March 2019 for more than two weeks.
Throughout this period, our agencies have been closely monitoring the situation and putting in place precautionary measures to guard against any potential pollution impacts arising from the illegal dumping of chemical waste at Sungai Kim Kim in Pasir Gudang. We have not detected any pollution impacts on Singapore's air and water quality or water supply.
The National Environment Agency (NEA) continuously monitors the ambient concentration of a variety of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) at our air monitoring stations, including at four stations located in the north-eastern region of Singapore. These include benzene, toluene, and xylene, as well as other common VOCs from industrial emissions which are also closely monitored by other environmental agencies such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
NEA has not detected any elevated levels of VOCs. The 24-hour Pollutant Standards Index (PSI) has also been in the Good to Low-Moderate range, while the one-hour PM2.5 readings remained in the Normal range. The Singapore Civil Defence Force (SCDF) has also deployed its portable stand-off chemical gas detectors at the northeast region of Singapore to detect toxic chemicals, and has not detected any toxic chemicals in the air.
For water quality, NEA's continuous buoy-based coastal water quality monitoring sensors deployed along the Straits of Johor have not detected any unusual variation in the key physical, chemical, and microbiological water quality parameters. NEA has also taken the additional step of collecting water samples at Pulau Ubin and its vicinity to test additional parameters, including compounds Malaysia has identified due to the chemical waste dumped in Sungai Kim Kim. These compounds have not been detected in our water samples. NEA has also not detected any anomalies in the quality of the waters at our recreational coastal beaches.
The Public Utilities Board (PUB)'s online sensors have shown that the water quality of Johor River, our waterways and reservoirs in the north and north-eastern part of Singapore, as well as the water supply is within normal variations. On-site inspections and water quality checks have also shown no abnormalities. As a precautionary measure, PUB has installed oil booms at the outlet drains and estuaries along the north and north-eastern coast of Singapore. This incident has no impact on our water supply as the chemical dumping location is outside of our Johor River catchment area, where part of our water supply comes from.
There have been no reports of unusual fish mortality at our local fish farms in the Straits of Johor. Singapore Food Agency (SFA)'s tests of seafood samples from these fish farms for compounds such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), VOCs, and heavy metals have not detected any anomalies.
We will continue to monitor the situation and provide updates if there are any significant developments. We will also continue to step up our checks and enforcement, to protect our environment and safeguard the health and safety of Singaporeans.
asked the Minister for Manpower (a) what is the current number of women who are out of the labour force because of their care-giving duties to family or relatives; (b) what is the average period they remained out of the labour force; (c) when such women re-enter the labour force, what are their labour market outcomes, disaggregated by employment type, age, and industry; and (d) to what extent do such women experience changes in income relative to their pre-caregiving income or to their non-caregiving peers.
: Based on the Ministry of Manpower (MOM)'s 2018 Comprehensive Labour Force Survey (CLFS), of the 543,500 female residents aged 25 and above who are not in the labour force, about two in three cited non-care-giving reasons, such as retirement, poor health/disability/old age and housework. About one in four cited care-giving to families (including childcare) or relatives as the main reasons they are out of the labour force.
Those providing care-giving to families (excluding childcare) or relatives are generally older – 75% are aged 50 and above. Majority had work experience; the median length of time since they left their jobs was nine years. Vast majority of those who are providing childcare are aged between 30 and 49. Most had prior work experience; the median length of time they have not been working was five years.
As survey respondents are different each year, the CLFS does not track the subsequent labour market outcomes of those who re-enter the labour force. To support the return of females back into the labour force, the Adapt and Grow initiative by MOM and Workforce Singapore (WSG) offers a suite of job matching services and programmes to help jobseekers overcome mismatches in skills, wages or job expectations. One of the programmes is Career Trial, which provides opportunities for jobseekers to try out jobs and assess new careers. This year, we are enhancing Career Trial to include part-time jobs. This will benefit women who are considering part-time jobs, in particular those with care-giving responsibilities.
asked the Minister for Manpower what is the number and proportion of CPF members turning 55 years of age in 2016, 2017 and 2018 respectively who have set aside the Basic Retirement Sum, disaggregated by gender and household income or by housing type as a proxy for household income.
32
asked the Minister for Manpower (a) what is the number and percentage of current CPF members who are inactive, broken down by gender; (b) of the inactive members, in the last three years, what percentage does not have at least the CPF Basic Retirement Sum in their Retirement Accounts when they turned 55 years old, broken down by gender; and (c) what is the difference in CPF balances of inactive male and female members.
: The cohort Basic Retirement Sum (BRS) is adjusted every year to take into consideration inflation and rising standards of living for successive cohorts of seniors in retirement. Even so, the proportion of active CPF members turning age 55 who had set aside their cohort BRS has increased steadily as shown in Table 1. This reflects higher labour force participation rates and rising incomes of successive cohorts of members.
The BRS attainment for both male and female CPF members have improved over the years and the difference in their savings have also narrowed. A study published by the CPF Board
1
showed that the male-to-female average CPF balance ratio has reduced from 1.20 in 2006 to 1.13 in 2016. We expect this trend to continue.
BRS attainment tends to mirror property wealth. It is highest among active CPF members who own a private property, and lowest for active CPF members who own 3-room or smaller HDB flats.
It is difficult to draw meaningful conclusions by looking at CPF balances of members who are economically inactive and thus not required to make CPF contributions. They are likely to have other means of provision which CPF Board has no sight of. Nevertheless, inactive CPF members who wish to save through the CPF system can do so through voluntary top-ups to their CPF accounts either through cash or CPF transfers from other members. These members can also benefit from several recent enhancements that make it easier for members to receive CPF transfers from their spouse, children and grandchildren.
asked the Minister for Manpower for each year from 2015 to 2018 and by disaggregated housing type (a) what is the number and proportion of households with at least one member over the age of 65 employing foreign domestic workers; and (b) how many of such households have received the Foreign Domestic Worker Grant.
: From 2015 to 2018, the number and proportion of resident households with at least one member aged 65 and above, employing foreign domestic workers (FDW) are shown in Table 1.
Households with members aged 65 and above who are Singapore Citizens (SCs) pay the concessionary levy rate of $60 per month
1
for the FDW they hire. In addition to this, the FDW Grant
2
provides support for eligible families to hire an FDW to care for loved ones who require permanent assistance with at least three activities of daily living. As at December 2018, about 9,500 households caring for seniors, aged 65 and above, were receiving the FDW Grant.
asked the Minister for Manpower (a) for each of the last three years, how many workers have been misclassified as self-employed persons when they should be classified as employees; (b) what are the major sectors or jobs where such misclassification has occurred; (c) whether there are links between emerging technologies or business models and self-employment misclassification; and (d) what are the actions taken to resolve misclassification including any penalties meted out to employers.
: In the last three years, the Ministry of Manpower (MOM) and Central Provident Fund (CPF) Board received a total of 308 cases of suspected misclassification. In 160 cases, workers were assessed to be misclassified as self-employed persons (SEPs)
1
. Each case that MOM and CPF Board investigate into could involve more than one worker. On average, about 100 workers per year were found to be misclassified.
In all but two of these misclassification cases, employers made good their obligations when informed of the misclassification, and paid back the affected employees what they were due, including overtime pay and CPF contributions. Penalties including warning and late payment interest charges were meted out to the companies. The two companies which refused to make the necessary payments to the affected employees were prosecuted. One subsequently fully settled the arrears out of Court while the other is currently appealing against its conviction.
The majority of these cases occurred in the contract labour suppliers, transport and logistics, construction and education sectors. The common occupations where such misclassification occurred include promoters, drivers, crane operators, service agents and carpenters.
The proportion of SEPs has remained stable at 8-10% of the resident workforce over the last decade. We have not observed a link between emerging technologies or business models and self-employment misclassification.
asked the Minister for Manpower (a) in each of the last three years, how many complaints of gender-related discrimination have been reported; (b) what is the breakdown of complaints by major reasons such as pregnancy, sexual harassment, unequal pay or work opportunities, or other gender-related reasons; and (c) what actions have been taken in category of complaints including any penalties meted out to employers.
: In the past three years, there were on average about 50 gender-related discrimination complaints reported to the Tripartite Alliance on Fair and Progressive Employment Practices (TAFEP) and Ministry of Manpower (MOM) annually, constituting 12% of the total number of complaints each year. The vast majority of these 50 complaints related to employers specifying their preference for a particular gender in their recruitment advertisements. About half of these were substantiated following investigations; as a result, MOM imposed sanctions on the employers, such as curtailing their work pass privileges. For the rest, investigations did not substantiate the complaints.
In the last three years, TAFEP received an average of about 10 workplace harassment complaints each year. For workplace harassment complaints which do not disclose a criminal offence, TAFEP notifies the employers and advises them to handle the complaint as an internal workplace matter by conducting an investigation, taking corrective actions and setting up mechanisms to handle future complaints appropriately, as outlined in the Tripartite Guidelines on Fair Employment Practices (TGFEP). All the employers so notified had conducted the necessary enquiries and instituted the appropriate corrective measures. Hence, TAFEP has not needed to impose any sanctions on employers for refusing to take action.
MOM also received about 70 pregnancy-related dismissal appeals annually in the past three years. This includes appellants who felt that they were wrongfully dismissed or forced to resign, or denied of maternity benefits. The number of cases that were substantiated and resulted in compensation to the employees remained relatively stable at about 50 per year. The other 20 cases were either dismissed as they were not substantiated or withdrawn by the employees.
MOM takes a serious view of workplace discrimination, including discrimination on the grounds of gender. We expect all employers to comply with our legislation, and abide by the principles of fair and merit-based employment practices outlined in the TGFEP. We urge all individuals who feel that they have been discriminated against to approach TAFEP and MOM for advice and assistance. MOM will not hesitate to take strong actions against errant employers.
