–
1 To ask the Minister for Defence (a) whether a safety time-out was called for all SAF training following the incident involving the late Corporal First Class (National Service) Aloysius Pang; (b) if not, why it was not called for; and (c) how the Ministry intends to reassure Singaporeans that safety in the SAF is paramount and is taken seriously following four training deaths in the last 16 months.
2
asked the Minister for Defence (a) how often are all safety manuals for training revised and updated across the Ministry; (b) how thorough is the safety orientation programme before the start of any field exercise; and (c) whether near-miss incidents due to safety lapses are reportable to superiors to plug any loopholes in the safety manuals.
3
asked the Minister for Defence (a) whether reservist NSmen are provided adequate refresher training before being deployed on missions or assigned tasks; (b) whether the SAF's safety manuals and programmes undergo review by external experts or industry panels to assess their adequacy; and (c) what has the Ministry done since the incidents over last two years to ensure the processes put in place have effectively address safety concerns and fulfil safety protocols.
4
asked the Minister for Defence in respect of the incident involving Corporal First Class (National Service) Aloysius Pang in New Zealand (a) whether there are stringent checklists for high risk operations and tasks, especially like the one the NSman was involved in; (b) whether there is practice and simulation training done to achieve competency before actual execution of these tasks; (c) whether these have been complied with in the aforementioned incident; and (d) how adequate is the level of supervision during such training and exercise.
5
asked the Minister for Defence how much training and preparation National Service reservists are put through to ensure that they are operationally ready before being deployed on assignments and missions.
6
asked the Minister for Defence (a) how often are the safety protocols and procedures of the SAF audited and assessed; and (b) whether these protocols and procedures are audited and assessed by any external or independent agencies.
7
asked the Minister for Defence regarding the death of a national serviceman during training on 23 January 2019 (a) what is the cause of his death; (b) what is the status of the investigations; (c) how can processes be improved to reduce the probability of something similar happening in the future; and (d) how is safety in training balanced with the need to create realistic operational circumstances.
8
asked the Minister for Defence (a) whether there will be a review to examine the deeper reasons for the increase in the number of SAF training deaths in recent years; (b) whether the number of training incidents resulting in minor and major injuries has also increased in the last three years; and (c) whether the Ministry will consider enrolling other members of a family who have had an immediate family member die or become disabled as a result of National Service in a non-combat vocation.
9
asked the Minister for Defence (a) how many military training deaths have occurred in the past three years; (b) what is the Ministry doing to address any effect on the confidence and morale of our NSmen and their families; and (c) how many officers and men were disciplined in the past three years on safety lapses during training.
10
asked the Minister for Defence (a) whether the Ministry will conduct annual anonymised safety culture surveys on SAF soldiers to understand safety concerns experienced by soldiers of all ranks; (b) with the army safety hotline set up since 2011, what are the initiatives to promote reporting and whether the current number of 50 calls a year is benchmarked with countries of similar military and operational standards; (c) whether there is formal training given to SAF soldiers on the technique of speaking up and formal training to given commanders on creating a safe culture for speaking up; and (d) whether a clear distinction between speaking up or refusing to obey an unsafe command and insubordination can be laid out.
11
asked the Minister for Defence whether NSmen go through adequate training and safety refresher courses immediately before participating in exercises and whether these courses need improvement.
12
asked the Minister for Defence whether the design of the Singapore Self-Propelled Howitzer will be reviewed to determine possible flaws contributing to the accident and death of Corporal First Class (National Service) Aloysius Pang.
13
asked the Minister for Defence (a) what is the cause of the accident resulting in the death of a national serviceman on 23 January 2019; (b) whether there are systemic similarities with the other NS training incidents over the last 18 months; and (c) what are the measures being put in place to prevent future occurrences.
14
asked the Minister for Defence what is the scope of the safety review announced by the Ministry in the aftermath of the accident involving the late Corporal First Class (National Service) Aloysius Pang and how does it differ from previous safety reviews announced after major incidents involving SAF personnel.
15
asked the Minister for Defence (a) whether any common causative factors can be discerned in the deaths of NSFs and NSmen over the past 18 months, by way of root cause analysis; and (b) whether any systemic changes in policy, guidelines or approaches to training will be undertaken to address the root causes of these training deaths.
16
asked the Minister for Defence (a) whether the safety protocols and procedures are the same and apply as stringently for both NSFs and NSmen; (b) whether additional safety considerations and measures are in place for NSmen due to their time away from active training; and (c) when was the last time SAF conducted a comprehensive review of its safety culture, and whether a new review is necessary.
17
asked the Minister for Defence whether the Ministry will consider building a small memorial to recognise all our national servicemen who lost their lives during service since the introduction of National Service more than five decades ago.
18
asked the Minister for Defence (a) how many cases of ragging have been reported in the SAF in the past five years; (b) whether the Ministry has taken measures to strengthen training on risk management and workplace safety in the SAF; and (c) whether there are any reward schemes to recognise positive behaviours demonstrated by officers who show care for fellow colleagues.
19
asked the Minister for Defence when the Primus Self Propelled Howitzer gun barrel is being lowered either while operated by its crew or when the repair/maintenance crew are on board, whether the existing training, operation and safety manuals, including standard operating procedures, do expressly provide for (i) specific and safe deployment positions for personnel in the cabin and (ii) specific instructions for personnel to stay clear of the gun barrel.
20
asked the Minister for Defence (a) what are the psychosocial support systems in place for NSmen and NSFs to augment SAF's safety culture; and (b) whether the Ministry will consider mental health first-aid training for all military supervisors so they can better support their men in times of distress and crisis.
: Question No 1.
: Mr Speaker, may I seek your permission for Question Nos 1 to 20 to be answered in the Ministerial Statement by the Minister for Defence later.
: Please proceed.
asked the Minister for Health to what extent should informed consent for minor medical procedures be sought from patients that will be considered reasonably detailed and effective and not lead to the practice of defensive medicine and drive up costs.
22
asked the Minister for Health in respect of the recent imposition of a $100,000 fine on an orthopaedic doctor (a) whether this will result in more instances of "defensive medicine"; (b) whether there will be an impact on medical costs as a result of doctors paying more for litigation insurance; and (c) how will the Ministry work with the Singapore Medical Council to reassure doctors that only egregious cases will attract heavy penalties.
23
asked the Minister for Health in respect of the recent action against a doctor for not informing his patient on the side effect of a minor medical procedure and the online petition by doctors for a review of the disciplinary action by the Singapore Medical Council (SMC) (a) what is the Ministry's position on the SMC ruling and its response to the petition; (b) what is the impact on clinical practice in Singapore if it is now mandatory for a doctor to outline and get the consent of a patient for every possible side effect and potential complications of a drug or treatment procedure; and (c) what is the impact of this requirement on medical costs and treatment.
24
asked the Minister for Health with regard to the fine meted out by the Singapore Medical Council on a surgeon for not informing his patient of the side effect of a medical procedure (a) whether the penalty is commensurate with similar cases in the past, and if there were extenuating circumstances for these cases; (b) whether the penalty meted out will (i) result in a shift of such procedures back to the hospitals and impact patients' accessibility of care and (ii) impact the future practice of medicine and overall healthcare costs in the long run; and (c) how do we define material information that patients need to be informed of under the modified Montgomery test.
: Mr Speaker, Sir, may I have your permission to take Question Nos 21 to 24 together?
: Please proceed.
: Mr Speaker, Members have raised several queries relating to the recent disciplinary action against an orthopaedic doctor for not informing his patient on the side effect of a minor medical procedure and the potential impact on clinical practice in Singapore. I understand Mr Murali Pillai had also filed a similar Question* on this issue and I hope that my reply will address the queries raised by the Member.
[(proc text) [*
Question subsequently withdrawn – Mr Murali Pillai: to ask the Minister for Health what is the Ministry's position on the concerns raised by the medical fraternity about the escalation of medical costs and heightened risk of doctors practising defensive medicine arising from the recent disciplinary action taken by the Singapore Medical Council against a registered medical practitioner for failing to advise his patient about the risks of administering an injection on the patient's left wrist.
] (proc text)]
First, let me briefly set out the background.
Dr Lim Lian Arn is an orthopaedic surgeon. His patient complained that Dr Lim had failed to advise her on the possible complications arising from an injection of a steroid and local anesthetic injection, also commonly known as H&L Injection. Dr Lim's treatment of the patient was found to be appropriate. But he did not advise nor document in the patient’s medical records, possible complications or the patient’s consent.
Dr Lim, who was represented by lawyers at the Disciplinary Tribunal or DT, pleaded guilty to a charge of professional misconduct under section 53(1)(d) of the Medical Registration Act for failing to obtain informed consent from the patient before administering the H&L Injection.
Through his lawyers, Dr Lim asked for the maximum fine of $100,000 in lieu of suspension or if the DT decided that suspension was warranted, a three-month suspension. The SMC had sought a suspension of five months.
After considering sentencing precedents and the facts and circumstances of the case, the DT agreed with Dr Lim’s counsel that the maximum fine of $100,000 would be an appropriate sentence. Both Dr Lim and the SMC did not appeal the sentence.
Members have asked how this case would affect the future practice of medicine, with regard to informed consent and what constitutes material information. Members also asked if the penalty was commensurate with similar cases in the past, and how MOH would assure doctors that only egregious cases will attract heavy penalties. Overall, Members were concerned about whether the decision will lead to defensive practices and increasing healthcare costs.
Let me first set out the overall situation, before discussing the specific matters in this case. From 2013 to 2018, the SMC convened Complaints Committees or CCs to investigate over 900 complaints. And in about 92% of these cases, the CCs were of the view that no formal inquiry by a DT was necessary.
In those cases referred to the DT, the profession accepted the DTs’ findings and sentences in most of them. Only in a few cases were questions raised.
Now, let me deal with some questions which have arisen in respect of this case.
First, on the issue of informed consent. It is wrong to infer, the decision makes it mandatory for a doctor to lay out and get the consent of a patient for every possible side effect and potential complications of a drug or treatment.
Dr Lim admitted that he was guilty of failing to inform the patient of any risks and complications; he was not found guilty for failing to inform the patient of all possible complications that could arise from the H&L Injection.
Second, what is considered material information? Under the SMC Ethical Code and Ethical Guidelines or ECEG, doctors are to disclose relevant and material information to their patients, while remote risks with minor consequences will generally be deemed immaterial and need not be disclosed. What a doctor needs to inform a patient about prior to a treatment or procedure continues to depend on the specific facts of the case, including the particular circumstances of the patient.
However, what is considered material information was not the issue before the DT in Dr Lim's case, and the DT did not apply the modified Montgomery Test as Dr Lim conceded that he had not informed the patient of any risks or complications at all.
In determining the sentence, the DT considered cases submitted by both counsel involving similar misconduct, where the sentences had ranged from fines from $5,000 to $10,000, with $10,000 being the maximum penalty allowed before the increase to $100,000 when the Medical Registration Act was last amended in 2010; to suspension orders from three to 12 months, or both fines and suspensions. Ultimately, the DT decided that the maximum fine of $100,000 requested by Dr Lim's lawyer would be the appropriate sentence.
There can be questions as to whether this was too high a fine, and why the SMC was asking for a five-month suspension. There has been considerable concern in the medical profession about the maximum fine having been imposed and that at one point suspension was considered. The concerns are understandable, when considering the facts and circumstances of this case. Many fair-minded doctors would think that the penalty imposed was harsh.
The appointment of a Sentencing Guidelines Committee on 1 January 2019 will therefore help in ensuring consistency and fairness in the sentences meted, and improve transparency and rigour in the disciplinary process.
Mr Speaker, the Ministry understands and acknowledges the concern that this decision, including the penalty, has caused to the medical profession. There has been feedback on the considerable confusion amongst medical practitioners on the requirements on informed consent and material information, and how the modified Montgomery Test and the ECEG should apply.
We want to take steps to reassure the profession – and to clarify the position – as the MOH does not want the profession to go down the path of defensive medicine. We acknowledge that the profession needs assurance on what the legal position is, and what the procedures/punishments are when disciplinary proceedings are undertaken. We will need to discuss the issues with the profession, in the context of a broader review of the current rules, processes and legal position, to achieve the above outcome.
Our medical disciplinary process is self-regulated. While the SMC administers the disciplinary process, the CCs and DTs comprise substantially of senior doctors and make decisions independently of the SMC. In arriving at their decisions, the CCs and DTs also obtain the opinions of experts who are peers of the respondent doctor. This protects both the public and ensures fairness to the doctors.
This system works well only with the support of doctors, and only if doctors understand and participate fully in the system. My Ministry will carefully consider what steps are necessary to maintain the trust between patients, doctors, SMC and MOH.
: I thank the Senior Minister of State. The Disciplinary Tribunal says that the doctors do not have to disclose all side effects but we have seen that in this case for the H&L injection, it was listed out from (a) to (g) the side effects that Dr Lim should have informed and noted in the case notes for the patient. So, it seems as though that although the DT says that the doctor does not have to list all the side effects to the patient, yet, at the same time, the charge is precisely that he had failed to list out all the side effects and that he should have done so. I could read out (a) to (g) but it would be very long, and that is precisely the point. Because it is a very long list, and the consultation would drag on for very long for the doctor.
So, the question is for MOH, when it says material information is all that is needed, how? (a) to (f)? (a) to (e)? (c) to (f)? How many side effects would be material information? And if the doctor informs the patient from (a) to (e) and leaves out (f), and if the patient gets (f) as a side effect, would then the doctor be liable?
: I would like to thank the Member for the clarification. I would like to reiterate that there is no need to list all the complications for a particular procedure. What is important is that the doctor needs to inform patients complications or side effects that are relevant to the patient.
In the grounds of the decision by the Disciplinary Tribunal in this case, I note that there were six possible complications that were listed from (a) to (f). But I would like to reassure Members of the House as well as the medical profession that these are just examples of some of the possible complications that Dr Lim could have told the patient. However, in this case, it is not a matter of whether sufficient complications or side effects had been counselled; rather, it is the case whereby Dr Lim had failed to even inform the patient of any possible side effects.
: Dr Lim Wee Kiak.
: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to declare my interest as a practising ophthalmologist. The medical fraternity currently has rallied, including with the public coming in, to raise a petition against this whole issue. Even for the public, they felt that this $100,000 fine is a little too excessive. Yes, I agree with the Senior Minister of State that it is self-regulatory, but self-regulatory does not mean no regulation at all. MOH should still have an oversight over SMC. My question, then, is what is MOH's position and will this $100,000 fine be reviewed again rather than to leave it as it is. If we leave it as it is, then the medical fraternity will just say that there is no change in everything else; which means that we still could be fined $100,000. If we miss out just one side effect, we could be fined.
: I would like to thank Dr Lim for the supplementary question, as well as to highlight the concern of the medical fraternity regarding this case. Particular to this case, we note that Dr Lim's lawyer had actually requested either $100,000 fine in lieu of suspension, or if the DT decided on suspension, a period of three months. Of course, this is based on past precedents, as noted by both SMC and the defendant's counsel. While the DT could have ordered an alternative sentence, it decided to impose the maximum of $100,000 as proposed by Dr Lim's lawyer and not to impose a suspension instead. But we acknowledge the concerns raised by the medical community and together with the Ministry of Law, we have assisted the SMC in appointing a Sentencing Guidelines Committee on 1 January 2019, as I have mentioned in my reply, so that we could assist the DTs and legal counsels in setting appropriate sentences going forward.
: Sir, I thank the hon Senior Minister of State for his comprehensive explanation. My question revolves around the fact that in the recent past, I see that doctors were somehow disquieted by SMC's rulings. Given that the medical profession is meant to be self-regulating, as mentioned by the hon Senior Minister of State, how do we address the gap between what is understood by the medical profession on one hand and the SMC's rulings meted out by senior doctors? In that regard, I note that there are sentencing guidelines that would be issued. What other steps can be taken to address this gap?
: I would like to thank the Member for the supplementary questions. Indeed, our medical disciplinary process is self-regulated. While SMC administers the disciplinary process, the CCs and the DTs, comprised substantially of senior doctors, make the decision independently of the SMC. So far, based on the statistics that I have given in my reply, majority of DT findings and sentences were accepted by the medical profession. Only a small number of cases attracted some questions with regard to the decisions. But based on these statistics, we can see that, actually, the self-regulatory processes are working very well. I do understand there are some concerns with regard to informed consent as well as material information, and we will engage the medical community to clarify some of these doubts that they may have.
: Dr Lim Wee Kiak.
: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me a chance to seek clarification. I would just like to ask the Senior Minister of State again: in the past, there have been precedents whereby DTs have thrown out certain cases but, in the end, upon appealing to the Ministers, the DT has to reopen the case again. In this case now, it is the direct opposite, which means that the DT has already decided, whether, currently, since there is a petition from both the public as well as from the medical fraternity to the Ministry, will the Minister now consider reopening this case?
: I thank the Member for the supplementary question. This case has been decided at the DT and has been accepted by both the defendant as well as the SMC. Therefore, there will be no need to reopen this case. But having said that, we will continue to look at some of the concerns of the medical profession. In fact, we will be engaging the three professional bodies of the medical profession to see how we can address some of these concerns. At the same time, if necessary, we will review the disciplinary processes in the form of amending the Medical Registration Act. And, if necessary, even amending other laws, moving forward.
: I thank the Minister for his clarification. I would like to ask that while we have retained the Bolam test for the diagnosis and treatment, that has provided clarity, but a significant issue is the Modified Montgomery Test, and that has created a lot of confusion on the ground. Would the Ministry then consider having it into the Statutes, so that it makes things a lot clearer? And what is the Senior Minister of State's view on the implications of clinical practice till the day we get clarity on this test?
: I would like to thank the Member for the very pertinent clarification. To put things in perspective, the Modified Montgomery Test was introduced in the Court of Appeal decision recently and not by MOH or the SMC. Prior to the Court of Appeal's decision in
Hii Chii Kok's
case in 2017, it was settled law in Singapore that the assessment of whether a doctor has met the requisite standard of care in all aspects of his interaction with the patient should be made with reference to the practices and opinions of a responsible body of medical practitioners although such practices and opinions must be logically defensible. This test, like what Mr Desmond Choo has mentioned, is also known as the Bolam-Bolitho test.
In May 2017, the Court of Appeal in
Hii Chii Kok
decided to move towards a somewhat more patient-centric approach when assessing the doctor's duty to advise, as the Court opined that the patient has autonomy over whether to proceed with the treatment and requires full information to make this decision.
I am clearly aware of the concerns of many medical professionals on the Modified Montgomery Test. I have personally received feedback from fellow medical practitioners especially on the requirement on informed consent and material information, and how this new test should be applied. There is also feedback from the medical community that this may lead to defensive medicine and escalation of healthcare cost.
MOH is aware and understands the apprehension and the confusion and uncertainty on the ground. MOH and SMC are studying the ruling and we will consult the profession on what should be the appropriate practice in Singapore, moving forward.
: Can I ask the Senior Minister of State, with the changeover to the Modified Montgomery Test and also taking the
Hii Chii Kok
case as an example – which of course has its pros and cons as well – moving forward, because we practise in a restructured hospital where there are lots and lots of junior doctors and personnel in training who are performing procedures almost every day and taking consent, so, perhaps, will MOH be able to come up with some kind of standardised guidelines for doctors in practice as well as for specialists? And also, perhaps, to do some focus group discussions, not only with the senior representatives but also with the junior level of doctors, because they are the ones whom we need to allay their anxieties, and they are the ones running the clinics, whether through direct supervision or indirect supervision by seniors and consultants; they are the ones who are running our clinics and the hospitals in the restructured hospital setting these days.
: I would like to thank Prof Fatimah Lateef for the suggestion. Indeed, we need to continue to provide education to medical profession with regard to proper documentation as well as consent-taking. In fact, it is important that the medical professionals properly document the management of patients under their care because properly kept medical records form the basis of good management of the patient and sound communications pertaining to the care of the patient. Anecdotally, it seems that many complaints by patients could have been avoided if their doctors had communicated with them better. One good example is in the
Hii Chii Kok
case where having proper documentation can actually even protect the doctor against unmeritorious complaints.
asked the Minister for Education whether the Ministry will consider having all GCE examination papers to be prepared and marked locally to minimise the risk associated with having the papers shipped and marked overseas.
26
asked the Minister for Education what are the Ministry's plans in ensuring the safety and integrity of our GCE examination scripts that are sent to the United Kingdom or other overseas marking centres.
27
asked the Minister for Education whether the Ministry has considered having the GCE "O" and "A" Level exams be e-exams where students key in answers via the computer, or to have written answer scripts be scanned and graded electronically so as to avoid situations of loss or tampering.
28
asked the Minister for Education (a) what is the timeline for the Ministry's plans to introduce electronic marking of GCE "O" and "A" Level examination scripts and whether the plans will be brought forward; (b) what action is the Ministry taking to prevent a recurrence of stolen or lost scripts including any mitigation action to be taken now pending any change of marking methods in future.
29
asked the Minister for Education with regard to GCE "N", "O" and "A" Levels examinations (a) whether examination scripts of all subjects will be scanned, digitalised and marked onscreen by the end of 2019 or will some subjects be exempted; (b) whether any overseas examination boards have conducted e-exams for examinations of similar level; (c) whether the Ministry has conducted trials or is conducting trials for holding e-exams for some subjects; and (d) whether schools and students are currently equipped to conduct and complete examinations digitally.
: Mr Speaker, Sir, may I take the next five questions together?
: Yes, please.
: I also note that Mr Murali Pillai has filed a similar Question* on this issue for the next Sitting, so I hope my answer today will also address the Member's question.
MOE and the Singapore Examinations and Assessment Board (SEAB) decide on the standards and the award of grades for our national examinations. At the same time, we engage Cambridge Assessment to develop and mark our GCE "N"/"O"/"A" Level examinations because they have strong global expertise and experience in these areas.
This arrangement has worked well for many years. Each year, there are about 1.1 million answer scripts generated in the GCE Level examinations. Three hundred thousand answer scripts are marked locally in Singapore while 800,000 answer scripts are marked by Cambridge Assessment. Cambridge Assessment in turn taps on about 2,200 professors and experienced educators from universities and higher institutions to mark the scripts.
Therefore, if we were to mark all the scripts locally, it requires a very substantial amount of highly qualified resources. As these are required during the school vacation period, we need to be mindful too about the workload and well-being of our teachers if all subjects are to be marked locally, and also the tight timeline between the examinations and the release of results.
Over the years, Cambridge Assessment has also taken their role very professionally and seriously. For example, following the recent "O" Level Additional Mathematics incident, Cambridge Assessment has reinforced the instructions given to their examiners on the handling and movement of scripts. The Examiner concerned will also not be engaged to mark scripts in future; it cannot be helped. Overall, this collaboration between MOE and Cambridge Assessment continues to be useful and necessary.
The next question then is whether we can improve the situation by marking the scripts electronically, to ensure the safety and integrity of the scripts, and prevent future losses.
In fact, since 2015 and before the recent incidents, SEAB and Cambridge Assessment have been working closely on a planned move to transit the distribution and marking of hardcopy GCE Level answer scripts to on-screen marking.
There are many professional advantages: tabulation of scores become much faster and efficient; there is no need to handle voluminous physical scripts; we can readily generate data to study how students perform in various papers, sections, or even questions, which will help us improve instructions and teaching.
Given the large number of answer scripts, the implementation of on-screen marking was carried out in phases. In 2017, we implemented this for GCE "N" Level examinations. In 2018 last year, this was extended to some GCE "O" Level examinations. Today, close to 65% of all GCE Level written scripts were marked on-screen already. By the end of this year, we are on track to mark on-screen almost all of GCE Level written scripts. From 2020, locally developed examination papers, namely GCE Normal (Technical) Level Basic Mother Tongue Language and "O" Level Literature in Mother Tongue Language, will be marked on-screen and more local papers will be included over the subsequent few years.
There are some examination papers that are not suitable for on-screen marking. For example, Science Practical examination scripts cannot be marked on-screen as these answer scripts may be contaminated with chemicals which makes them unsuitable for scanning. Other examinations like drama or art are obviously also not suitable for on-screen marking.
Members have also asked if we could go beyond on-screen marking to conduct electronic-examinations, on-screen examinations.
There are a few examination boards that have implemented e-examinations, for example, the SAT test by US College Board for college admission. The approach in Singapore is to use e-examinations when there is clear benefit over paper-based tests.
For example, SEAB has already implemented e-oral exams across all levels for Mother Tongue Language subjects. We use video clips to set the context, and that enables a richer and more meaningful interaction compared to just showing a picture, which was what we went through, probably. This will be extended to the GCE "N" Level English in 2019 and "O" Level English in 2020.
We have introduced computer-based writing examination as a pilot in a few subjects, such as the GCE "O" and "A" Level Mother Tongue Language Syllabus B's Paper 1 and GCE "A" Level H2 Mother Tongue Language and Literature. So far the feedback has been positive as the candidates found the e-examination more engaging and authentic.
It is possible that in time to come, more written examinations can be administered on screen as well. Students can more readily cut and paste, edit their essays, move paragraphs around. They can be asked to respond to an email, write a blog or a social media post, all these better reflect real life situations that students will go through later in life.
But we are still some time away from that future. We need to take into account the readiness of schools and students. More importantly, notwithstanding the high computer penetration rate amongst our population, we should not inadvertently disadvantage students who may not be exposed to computers as much as others. Ideally, e-examinations needs to be aligned to the schools’ use of technology in teaching and learning.
Let me conclude, even as MOE, SEAB and Cambridge Assessment work towards on-screen marking and e-examinations, let me emphasis that every system has risks. Going electronic will eliminate the risk of lost scripts, but new risks associated with electronic data will surface. So, whatever system we adopt in future, we need to study the pros and cons carefully, proceed methodically, identify and ensure that risks are managed and mitigated to the greatest extent possible.
: Dr Intan.
: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for the assurance of the steps that will be taken to ensure the integrity and security of our Cambridge exam papers. While we move towards more of e-examinations and online marking, I think that will take several years. Will we consider doing entirely all of our GCE marking locally? The Minister mentioned that, yes, it will require a lot more markers and teachers, but I think we do have the capability here and would it not be easier to fly in some of the markers and auditors from Cambridge to audit the marking, rather than leaving our papers overseas where our exam papers have been taken onboard trains and that is why they were lost. Because when we do marking here, even for the PSLE papers, papers are not removed from the marking centres at all.
: The consideration is a practical one. As I mentioned, Cambridge Assessment hired 2,200 markers. We have the capability to do all the markings locally. I am very confident of that. But considering that between examinations and release of results, it is of a certain time frame, 2,200 additional markers are required. So, while you may save time transporting the scripts, the amount of extra resources required is huge. And I am quite mindful of the workload of teachers especially during vacation. We need to turnaround this in a very short time. So, on balance, the collaboration with Cambridge Assessment has been working well, not withstanding this couple of incidents. They take their role very professionally. Even as we move to e-marking, this is a collaboration that, on the whole, logistically, taking into account the resources and costs required, it is still worthwhile for us to do so.
: I thank the Minister for his answers. Just one supplementary question. Pending any future changes to the marking method and the examination method, since the last incident, have any new measures been taken to improve the transportation and delivery of the scripts to UK and back to Singapore. Thank you.
: The protocol is all there, that once a marker has scripts in their hands, they are not supposed to leave it behind, and I think this is what happened in this particular incident. A bag was left behind and someone mistook the bag and he lost 32 scripts. Cambridge Assessment took this very seriously. It is a very unfortunate lapse. They have since tightened the instructions, conveyed to all the markers. The marker who was involved, he would not be engaged anymore. I think with their efforts and constant reminders, we can mitigate such risks to the minimum extend possible.
: Just one more question. Maybe not quite directly related to these current questions that you are managing right now. Just looking at the potential risks of such summative assessment formats such as the GCE exams, would we consider, going forward, to minimise the dependence on such summative assessment formats and look at more at how we can balance such summative exams with students' portfolios for instance. Because for the students whose exams papers are missing, they get a certain prorated grade which they feel that sometimes it is fair, sometimes it is not quite fair. But if they have a student portfolio, they know that it is their work, built up over time, that they can depend on for admission to the next entry level in their education journey.
: It is a question about summative versus formative assessment. If we have more formative assessments, more regular tests, there is actually more risks of losing scripts. But, I think it is a valid question on the direction that education is going. Given our system today, summative assessments will still play a big role. Because parents and students depend a lot on PSLE for allocation of places in Secondary schools, and from Secondary schools moving to JC or Polytechnic. But, I think what we ought to refine is at the admission level. That beyond looking at the summative test result, can we look at portfolio, as the Member mentioned, performances in other areas outside of academic. So, DSA scheme, EAE schemes that we had introduced and refined over the years, all these will help towards the move away from over-relying on summative tests.
: I thank the Minister for his reply and I appreciate his concern for the workload of his staff and the teachers. At the Autonomous Universities, we have to complete all our marking locally within a very short span of time as well and it is a very stressful period for all of the Faculty. But I wonder if the Ministry could commit, for example, to studying this issue of the costs of arranging for all of the marking locally. What would be the cost implications of doing that versus the current arrangement with Cambridge Assessment. The reason why I asked this is, I think there should be no questions internationally about the credibility of our examination system if it were to be done all locally. I think Singapore has established a good reputation in that regard and I am confident that if we were to do it locally, we should have no issues with the reputation of students' credentials. Thank you.
: A couple of points. First, the question may well be moot because by the end of this year, we will have substantially moved everything to electronic marking. So, the whole concern about transport of scripts which really underpins this concern, will not arise. But as I mentioned earlier, moving away from scripts, you will eliminate the risks of losing scripts but moving to electronic marking, a new set of risks will surface.
I think the deeper question is this collaboration with Cambridge Assessment. I fully agree with the Member that Singapore has a good reputation in education, there is high regard internationally for our education system. We are in a good position to do this ourselves and harness the resources to mark the papers, set the questions. But I think we are where we are too because of a certain earnestness to learn from different systems around the world and to work with different credible, reputable systems around the world. And this approach led us to working with Cambridge. Many, many years of working with them, Cambridge helped us, raised us to this level of international repute. So, I think it is a collaboration that is still worthwhile keeping while mitigating the risks of lost scripts.
asked the Minister for Communications and Information (a) what is the status of the Postal Quality of Service framework review; (b) how many complaints has SingPost received about missing mails in the past year; and (c) how many of these missing mail cases have been resolved.
31
asked the Minister for Communications and Information (a) in the past 36 months, how many complaints have been received on misuse of failed postal delivery notices when recipients are home; and (b) whether IMDA investigates these complaints to ensure compliance of the Postal Quality of Service framework.
: Mr Speaker, may I have your permission to take Question Nos 30 and 31 together?
: Yes, Please.
: Mr Speaker, as the designated public postal licensee, SingPost is responsible for delivering letters on time, and accurately. SingPost has to meet the Postal Quality of Service (QoS) standards set by the Info-communications Media Development Authority (IMDA) for letter delivery. SingPost also provides other services, such as advertisement mail and parcel delivery, that are not subject to IMDA's Postal QoS standards. The recent lapses by SingPost involve services covered by the Postal QoS standards, and those that are not.
For letter delivery, the QoS standards are: to deliver 99% of local basic letters destined for the Central Business District (CBD), and 98% for those destined for non-CBD areas, by the next working day; and 100% for all letters by the second working day. IMDA imposed a financial penalty of $100,000 on SingPost last week for failing to meet the QoS standards in 2017. SingPost has accepted IMDA's decision and committed to improve its service delivery standards, including its QoS performance. IMDA is reviewing SingPost's performance for letter delivery in 2018.
In 2018, SingPost received 91 complaints about mis-delivered and lost mail. SingPost has investigated each complaint, and has apologised to the complainant whenever there was a confirmed service lapse, and re-delivered mail that was found. IMDA has also reviewed its QoS standards for letter delivery, and has decided to maintain them.
Er Dr Lee also asked about complaints relating to consumers receiving failed delivery notices even when there was someone at home. These pertain to the delivery of parcels and registered articles. Eight such complaints were submitted directly to IMDA in 2018, and seven in 2017. SingPost is unable to provide the specific number of complaints it receives on failed delivery notices. Nonetheless, we believe that there are likely to be more incidents which were not formally reported.
IMDA will pay attention to this area as well. It is now considering regulatory standards for the delivery of parcels and registered articles.
SingPost's Board and management agree with my Ministry and IMDA that a thorough review of its operations and manpower has to be made even as it takes immediate steps to remedy the service lapses. They have reaffirmed SingPost’s commitment to prioritise improvements to service delivery standards and the welfare of its workforce. SingPost has already made a start by announcing measures such as extending parcel delivery to Saturdays, cutting back on advertisement mail delivery and improving staff remuneration.
Mr Speaker, please allow me to make brief remarks on the issues of operations and manpower. SingPost has pointed out that the popularity of e-commerce has significantly increased the volume of parcels. As a result, it has to deliver 38,000 items daily which cannot fit into letterboxes and its postmen have to now conduct more deliveries for parcels. This works out to an average of 35 to 45 doorstep deliveries per postman per day in Singapore's urban landscape with many high-rise HDB blocks and condominiums, in addition to delivering letters to letter boxes. My Ministry and IMDA are of the view that SingPost must make itself ready for this new operating environment.
Next, on manpower. The work of the postman is labour-intensive and has become more so over the years. My Ministry and IMDA are of the view that, even as SingPost remedies its service lapses, its postal workforce should be treated fairly and be well-equipped to perform their job. Where necessary, IMDA will provide support to SingPost in the training of postmen, delivery process re-engineering, deployment of technological solutions and infrastructure upgrades to optimise its delivery process.
It may take time before the gaps in SingPost's service delivery are fully addressed. The SingPost Board and management know there is hard work ahead, and have told us that they are committed to work together with my Ministry and IMDA. Further regulatory action from IMDA can be expected, as it reviews SingPost’s letter delivery performance for 2018 and beyond, investigates infringements under the Postal Services Act and considers additional regulatory standards.
: Mr Speaker, Sir, I would like to thank the Senior Minister of State for her very comprehensive long reply. I have six supplementary questions. I filed a Parliamentary Question (PQ) in February 2017 here, on letters frequently delivered to the wrong addresses. Since then, the situation has gone from bad to worse. Residents are now not just complaining that letters are delivered to the wrong addresses, there are also many complaints that the letters they are expecting do not arrive, and the worst was towards end of last year. That is why I filed a question again.
My first question is, did SingPost foresee seasonal peak and the surge of e-commerce and planned for it. Why has it become much worse at the end of last year? Are there shortages in manpower and if there are, is there any study into the remuneration package and welfare for postman and other ground service staff. Because I noted that SingPost made a profit of $42.2 million on operating activities. So, did they do a remuneration package study.
My second question is, there is only one postal service company in Singapore and it is doing essential service. How do we ensure that they are not complacent? Because this issue has been brought up in Parliament before. It is not getting better but getting worse. So, it shows that maybe they are complacent.
The third question is, they are found according to the report last week to have many lapses in 2017 and falling short can result in a fine up to $50,000 a month for each indicator. My question is, why were they only fined $100,000. Is fine alone sufficient deterrence?
Earlier, the Senior Minister of State mentioned about regulatory requirement and I have also read on several occasions that the Ministry had implied or mentioned the revoking of licence. I would like to ask under what circumstances will the licence be revoked. And are there any plans to issue more than one licence so that there is competition? Perhaps, they cannot cope. So, we may want to look into having more than one postal services provider in Singapore.
Last but not least, and this is the most important question: what action will be taken in general, and at Yishun Town in particular, in order to bring back the trust and confidence of people.
: Er Dr Lee mentioned six supplementary questions; I counted five. But if I leave out any, she is welcomed to ask again.
I will take her last question first, which is what actions for the residents of Yishun. Indeed, amongst the complaints that SingPost received and the ones that have been sent to IMDA last year, IMDA has noted that some of these complaints pertain to the Yishun area. It has discussed with SingPost and SingPost has re-deployed two experienced postmen to cover the Yishun beats as of November 2018. We hope that this would address at least some of the concerns but IMDA will be monitoring this very closely.
Er Dr Lee has also asked about the situation in Yishun as of the end of last year, as her first question. So, I think we have addressed that.
She has also asked whether SingPost had planned for the seasonal peaks and what has it been doing to cope with the operating environment. Mr Speaker, as I have mentioned earlier, we believe that the operating environment, however it changes, that is the responsibility of SingPost to plan for it. SingPost has talked about seasonal peaks and about the changing proportion of parcels to letters. We are of the view that this is something which it, as the service provider and the operator, should plan for and ensure that its workforce is properly remunerated, properly trained and equipped to do this job.
As for the status of SingPost as the postal service provider, I believe the next two questions that Er Dr Lee had mentioned, pertain to this. Let me explain, Mr Speaker. Under our current framework, we have one public postal licensee that is SingPost. But it is not the only ones who are licensed to deliver basic letters. There are four in total. As the public postal licensee, what they need to do is, in addition to delivering letters, they have to maintain a set of universal service obligations (USOs). These include, for instance, the maintenance of posting boxes, the issuance of stamps and there is an obligation to deliver basic letters from and to anyone within Singapore. That is what we call the USOs. Those are the obligations tied to being the public postal licensee. This does not mean they have a monopoly on the delivery of basic letter services. This segment of the market has also been opened up; as explained, there are now four in total. As for the parcel delivery, this is also a very open and competitive segment. We have many companies that are doing parcel and door-to-door delivery.
Er Dr Lee has asked about the quantum of the fine and whether that is considered sufficient. First, allow me to explain that under the QoS framework, IMDA does have discretion to decide how much financial penalty to levy for each count of failing the QoS. I have described earlier in the main reply there are several types of QoS that the public postal licensee has to abide by. In terms of determining the actual quantum per count, IMDA would take into account factors such as whether there are aggravating factors, for instance, has there been repeated failures, and also, mitigating factors, for instance, whether or not the delay time is longer or shorter.
We completely agree with Er Dr Lee that relying on fines is not sufficient. As I have mentioned, regulatory action is on-going. More can be expected from IMDA in the coming months. But very importantly, other measures also need to be taken. We are glad to see that SingPost has owned the issue and has announced steps in the right direction, for instance by extending delivery hours, by re-looking at remuneration for its workforce and so forth. At the same time, the use of technology must continue. This is something that IMDA has been in constant discussion with SingPost on, and in fact, in previous years, have also required SingPost to take on technological upgrade so that its postal workforce can do its job better.
The next question that Er Dr Lee has asked touches on who gets to deliver basic letters, so I think I have covered that when I explained the overall framework.
: My residents have also told me that they often do not receive letters even from my constituency office. So, I am also worried. With the increased popularity of emails, we often think that snail mail will lose its popularity. But when we look at the annual financial report of SingPost, in the last financial year, 90% of SingPost's profit comes from postal service. In other words, postal service is the cash cow for SingPost. So, I would like to ask the Senior Minister of State, is it the case where SingPost is under-investing in postal services while they try to take some money to diversify their business?
: I believe that Mr Ang Wei Neng's question is also something that should be asked of SingPost by its shareholders; after all, it is a listed company. I understand that these are also the issues that the shareholders should hold SingPost to account for. In terms of under-investing, I shall not comment on this specific issue. However, I think we can also take cognisance of the steps that SingPost has talked about, in terms of paying more attention to the postal workforce, in ensuring that the operations are right, in extending the delivery hours. So, I think those steps that they have mentioned are indicative of what SingPost's own diagnosis of the problem is. However, IMDA will nto stop here. We will continue to work very closely with SingPost. We will also continue to monitor and regulate.
: I thank the Senior Minister of State for the comprehensive answer. While we are still waiting for technological solutions such as use drones to deliver mail, I wonder if the Ministry could consider or help to facilitate alternate delivery agents and systems for now. In the Central CDC, we tried a drop-mail system where we employed senior citizens who are still healthy to drop mail in their localities. We found the outcomes to be quite good in accuracy and the speed was very fast, maybe better than SingPost. The CDC does not have the ability to scale it, but I believe there is a good potential there to create reliable delivery systems, employing seniors; and also graduands of Special Education schools and others who may not be able to have other forms of jobs.
I wonder if the Ministry and other related agencies would be interested in helping us organise this so that we can scale this kind of system and create interim jobs that might be meaningful, and also provide opportunities for seniors and others to build better health and earn some pocket money.
: I thank Ms Denise Phua. I shall ask IMDA to work closely with her CDC to understand this pilot scheme that she has started and to see how this can improve postal services. In terms of other solutions that the Member had asked, I would also like to take this opportunity to say that locker trials have started in two locations in Bukit Panjang and in Punggol under the Locker Alliance. This is a trial that SingPost is also a part of, to see whether there can be better solutions for the last-mile delivery of parcels which may be too large to fit into letter boxes.
: I would like to thank the Senior Minister of State for a very comprehensive reply and the assurances. I just have a question, and this pertains to the timeline. I understand that some time may be needed for SingPost to address the gaps and as MCI considers additional regulation, may I know if there is a timeline for both these aspects? In the mean time, what else might we be able to expect to ensure that the letter delivery performance will still be upheld?
: I thank Ms Tin. We make no assumptions as to how long this journey is going to take. But I can share at this moment that IMDA aims to release its decision with regards to SingPost's 2018 letter delivery by the middle of this year.
: I would like to thank the Senior Minister of State for informing the House that two experienced postmen have been put in to serve the residents of Yishun Town. During my recent visit to SingPost's Woodlands distribution centre, I came to understand that actually, there is a shortage of postmen serving in Yishun Town. There are supposed to be 40-over postmen, but they only have 30-plus. I would like to ask when will the number of postmen be increased? Otherwise, they are over-stressing the current working postmen, and that is why sometimes, you will find that there are other consequences. That is one question.
The second question, just now, the Senior Minister of State mentioned about thorough review with SingPost. I would like to know is there any timeline given because we do not want them to just over-stress the postmen and the ground service staff. I think they are over-stressed; they work very hard.
I think the Senior Minister of State did not answer one of my questions. I asked under what circumstances would the licence be revoked.
: First, Er Dr Lee has asked about staffing issues. I think that by announcing its plans to hire more postmen, SingPost is acknowledging that there are vacancies and I believe it is not only restricted to the Woodlands distribution centre. We believe that with SingPost's intention to also review remuneration for the staff, we hope that these vacancies will be easier to fill than they currently are now.
In terms of the concern on manpower, indeed, we share Er Dr Lee's concerns about the importance of maintaining the well-being of the postal workforce. This is the reason why it is not just about tightening requirements and levying the penalties, but also monitoring very closely to ensure that first of all, the workforce is adequately trained and prepared for the job that they have to do. This is certainly a priority for my Ministry and also for IMDA.
In terms of the circumstances under which the licence for being the public postal licensee will be revoked, first of all, I want to state that we do need an operator to maintain the universal service obligations. As I have mentioned, it is not just about delivery of the letters. It is about maintaining the posting boxes, it is about issuance of stamps, it is also about having somebody who undertakes to deliver and collect letters from anywhere in Singapore. So, this has to be given. What we currently have is a set of QoS standards to monitor the delivery of letters. But as I have mentioned, SingPost is not immuned to competition here. IMDA will be monitoring this very carefully. I do not think at this moment that the lapses in terms of the QoS standards are such that it warrants removing of the licence. However, we are very conscious of the pain points that consumers have reported, including pain points concerning services that are not covered by the QoS, and this is the reason why IMDA is now also considering additional regulatory standards.
asked the Minister for Manpower what safeguard can be provided to employers of foreign domestic workers (FDWs) who are required by employment agencies to make advance payment of the FDW's monthly salary purportedly to settle loans or outstanding dues owed by the domestic workers to foreign parties.
: Mr Speaker Sir, foreign domestic workers (FDWs) incur expenses in their home countries when they seek opportunities to work overseas. For instance, they may be required to pay their employment agency (EA) a fee. This cost is typically paid by their employers on their behalf in the form of advance salary payments facilitated by the EA.
To protect employers and FDWs, EAs are required by law to fully disclose the terms and conditions of their services, including the amount FDWs are charged and their refund policies on advance salary payments by employers. In the event that the employer terminates the FDW employment contract early and sends the FDW back to the EA, or the FDW commits an offence and has to be repatriated, the EA would usually refund any outstanding advance salary payment made by the employer.
MOM expects EAs to fully discharge their duties and obligations to employers and FDWs, and safeguard the interests of these parties. In addition to conducting regular inspections, we also act on feedback received and will not hesitate to take irresponsible or errant EAs to task.
: Mr Speaker, Sir, I thank the hon Senior Parliamentary Secretary for the answer. I have a supplementary question. It is in relation to allocation of risk. In a situation where a foreign domestic worker leaves earlier than anticipated, and where a family has already made advance payment to an employment agency, which collects it for a foreign employment agency. Could the Ministry consider, perhaps, the employment agency issuing a bond such that if such a situation happens, at least the family can recoup the losses through the exercise of its rights under the bond.
: 	Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Member Mr Murali Pillai for the suggestion on the bond. Let the MOM team think through the pros and cons of this suggestion. At this point in time, allow me to assure Mr Murali Pillai that the employers of FDWs have alternative options and also avenues for recourse. For example, although employers generally prefer the advance salary payments because they hope that the FDW will stay with them for the entire contract, there are some employers, who, for various reasons, do not prefer the advance salary payments and these employers can approach EAs that are able to customise a package to suit their needs. So, there are varying practices in the market.
For Mr Murali Pillai's point, to protect employers and FDWs, MOM requires the EA to clearly state their refund policies in the service agreement. For example, if the FDW terminates the employment prematurely, the employers should check the contract that they signed with the EA, because the contract will lay out whether and under what circumstances, they will get full or partial refund. I want to assure Mr Murali Pillai that we take this very seriously. Every single case that is surfaced to MOM, will be followed-up and investigated thoroughly. Since 2016, MOM had investigated and taken actions against two EAs that had failed to state their refund policies.
: Mr Speaker, Sir, I have a further supplementary question. The suggestion I have made in relation to the provision of a bond, is to deal with the function of the employment agency as a collecting body, as opposed to the usual situation envisaged in a contract where the employment agency is really seeking to be paid its own fees. In the context of the employment agency being a collection agency, perhaps, the risks associated with the monies being given to the employment agency only to be delivered to a foreign employment agency can be dealt with through the bond system.
: 	I want to thank the Member for his supplementary question. He rightly described it as risk and a bond instrument could also mean that there will be fee charges which may inadvertently be passed on to the consumer, in this case, the FDW employer. So, we need to think through the suggestion very carefully. I want to say that MOM has put in place fee caps to regulate what an EA can charge the FDW, and that is important, because that may then manifest itself as advance salary payment. And EAs are not allowed to collect fees that exceed FDWs' monthly salary for each year of contracted service. EAs who flout this rule may be prosecuted or even have their licences revoked. We will also issue warning letters or composition fines to less egregious EAs.
The example that Mr Murali Pillai highlighted was that the EAs should not function as a collection agent. While MOM will undertake all the necessary efforts to prohibit our Singapore-based EAs from charging the FDWs beyond the fee cap, we must also explain that we have no jurisdiction over the EA in the home country of the FDW.
Having said that, for the case that Mr Murali Pillai's resident is facing, if he could share with us the information, that would be most helpful. We will then be able to investigate this further and if we find any suspicious or irregular practices, we can follow up with the relevant Embassy and enlist their help so that we can stop the malpractice at source.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) whether BCA has plans to mandate child-proof pool fences in private swimming pools in view of the increasing number of near-drowning cases involving children and 10 deaths reported in KK Women's and Children's Hospital from 2011 to 2015; and (b) what are the measures taken by BCA over the years to improve the safety of private swimming pools.
: Mr Speaker, for the safety of young children, the Code of Practice for the design and management of aquatic facilities recommends that toddler and learner pools be situated away from the deep areas of other pools, and this is done to prevent unintended use. There are also safety-related guidelines under the Code for warning signs, slip-resistant flooring, depth markings as well as providing adequate lighting.
As an added safety precaution, private pool owners can install child-resistant barriers, and for strata-titled developments, the management corporations may make such improvements to their swimming pools, by passing a special resolution.
Besides infrastructural measures, parents and caregivers should closely monitor young children when they are near swimming pools. I think that is most important as well. Water safety education is also as important. As part of the physical education curriculum, all Primary school students are taught water safety knowledge and basic swimming skills. This is done through the SwimSafer 2.0 programme, in partnership with SportSG. SportSG has also been actively carrying out water safety outreach and education programmes to raise public awareness. Management corporations of condominiums that also wish to participate in these programmes, or seek water safety advice in general, can also contact the management team at SportSG directly.
: Despite what has been done, we are still seeing about 10 cases over five years. Do you think there is something more we can do about it? For example, to include mandating some of these pool fences in private swimming pools. Is this something doable?
: 	I thank the Member for her query. Mr Speaker, based on the statistics reported, five of the children who had died were at pool parties. So, technically, the adults were also there. It is unclear for the others how the situation occurred. But in those cases that I mentioned, the provision of a child restraint barrier, even if mandated, would not have been sufficient in avoiding these incidents. What is important then would be adult supervision, which is still the most effective means in ensuring the safety of young children when they use the pool.
We have to balance the risk as well as the obligations that we want to put on private and public pool owners, for example, in terms of putting up barriers. Ultimately, it is quite onerous for some of these pool owners, as the pools can be quite big in condominium developments, for example. Today, even without a mandatory requirement, MCSTs and condominium owners could potentially pass a resolution to put barriers in place. Private pool owners could also do so, and I think mandating could be quite difficult to implement.
Having said that, it could be something we can review. The cases have to be reviewed in more detail to see what the root causes are. But again, as I stressed earlier on, adult supervision is the most important aspect. And of course, as they move to Primary school, we do have programmes in place to ensure that our students are well educated and have greater safety awareness when they use pools and water bodies.
asked the Minister for National Development whether the Ministry will consider making Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) mandatory for all construction works near national parks or nature reserves and making such EIA reports publicly available.
: Mr Speaker, today, development projects that are near sensitive areas, including Nature Reserves, Nature Areas, areas of significant biodiversity as well as marine and coastal areas, are required to undergo an in-depth consultation process with the relevant technical agencies to discuss the scope of works, the possible environmental impact and corresponding mitigating measures.
If the potential environmental impact of a project is assessed to be significant, we will require the project developer to conduct further environmental studies to thoroughly assess the nature and magnitude of the impact, and to implement more extensive mitigating measures to address them.
As I have previously said in this House, our intention is to make publicly available the findings from such environmental impact assessments, unless there are specific reasons such as security considerations that require us to maintain confidentiality.
: I thank Minister for the reply. I understand that he said that only the findings are released, bearing in mind that some of these reports might contain some sensitive data. Taking the Tengah case for example, where there are some disputes on the ground with regards to the findings of the study, whether releasing the full report minus the sensitive data, will help to clarify some of the concerns on the ground and also provide more assurances on the ground?
: I thank the Member for the supplementary question. EIA reports have been gazetted in full to make very clear to interested parties, including the environmental groups, what the findings are and what the impact is. For Tengah, the findings of the environmental baseline study were shared with the public through the media in October last year. We will also be engaging with nature groups to share with them the details of the environmental baseline study. As the Member would know, Tengah is and remains a military training ground.
asked the Minister for Social and Family Development over the past five years, how many cases have been reported of working adults who have faced short-term family support challenges such as taking care of young sick children or elderly sick parents who cannot be left in childcare centres or nursing homes respectively.
: Mr Speaker, in the past five years, we received feedback from less than 200 working adults on short-term family support challenges. The main concern was the challenges they face in managing work and care-giving responsibilities, for example when the children and elderly parents suddenly fall ill and care arrangements need to be made at the last minute.
To attend to childcare needs, each parent can tap on six days of infant care leave per year for children below two years old, another six days of childcare leave per year if their youngest child is below seven years old, and two days per year if their youngest child is aged 7 to 12. These leave provisions are on top of the parents' annual leave provisions.
In addition to leave provisions, to better help working adults manage their care-giving and working responsibilities, it is important for employers to also provide a family-friendly work environment, so that working care-givers also have the support and flexibility needed to balance work and care-giving responsibilities and duties.
In the last two years, MOM introduced the Tripartite Standard on Flexible Work Arrangements or FWAs to encourage employers to offer FWAs. MOM also introduced the Tripartite Standard on Unpaid Leave for Unexpected Care Needs to encourage employers to provide employees with additional leave support during unexpected care-giving exigencies. MOM also provides funding support to employers for the sustained adoption of FWAs through the Work-life Grant.
In anticipation of the rising eldercare needs as our population is ageing rapidly, we also have been studying how to better support care-givers. In this aspect, MOH together with the MOM and MSF, have undertaken a review to strengthen support for care-givers of seniors. As part of this process, we have sought the views of care-givers, aged care service providers, healthcare professionals, community organisations, as well as tripartite partners. We will share more details in response to the Motion on Support for Care-givers which would be tabled for discussion in this week's Sitting.
: I thank the Minister of State for the assurance that more will be done by MOM, MOH and MSF.
I understand that, yes, there are leave provisions for family care and childcare. But again, this varies, depending on employers, depending on the profession that you are in. So, there are parents, working adults, who face difficulties when caring for many young children and caring for a few elderly parents, not just their own parents but including parents-in-law. So, are there current arrangements by any of the MSF partners in providing short-term family care and support at the moment?
My second supplementary question is if there are any plans by MSF, working with other partners, to pilot an integrated family care drop-in centre for such short-term care and support, whether it is at our existing childcare or senior care centres, or even in our polyclinics, for instance, for those who have children with contagious or infectious diseases like HFMD or chickenpox, or elderly parents who have pneumonia, where some amount of medical care is required?
: I thank the hon Member for raising two very important questions. Indeed, these are issues that we have been looking at. So, for example, for the respite care for parents with seniors at home, I understand that MOH is currently looking into enhancing the provision of respite care.
As for parents with young children where they need to put their children at the drop-in centres when their children fall sick and so on, and so forth, this is something that is fairly complex. So, my Ministry has been looking at this. And I am glad that the Member has raised this. That has also strengthened our resolve in reviewing this and to come up with some solutions. So, we will be working and discussing with the agencies under the Ministry as well as with community partners to find a solution to address the childcare needs on an ad hoc and urgent basis by the parents. Once again, I thank the Member for the suggestions.
: Assoc Prof Walter Theseira.
: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister of State for his reply. I wonder in the case of daily-rated workers which would constitute a significant proportion of the lower income, whether the Ministry has plans to provide, for example, income support or other means of assistance for those who encounter these issues because they effectively cannot take leave. If they take leave, as they are daily-rated, they do not get paid at all.
: I thank the Nominated Member for this very important question. As this is something that is new, we will have to look at it. And it is also something concerning the employment matters. So, we will have to study it together with MOM.
asked the Minister for Social and Family Development in the last five years (a) how many cases of child abuse and elder abuse respectively have been reported annually; (b) what are the common types of abuse inflicted on these children and elderly victims; and (c) what are the common types of familial relationship the perpetrators have with the victims.
: Mr Speaker, in the last five years, MSF's Child Protective Service has investigated an average of about 600 child abuse cases annually. Since the Adult Protective Service was set up in 2015, MSF has investigated an average of 78 cases annually involving elders above the age of 65.
The majority of both our child and elder abuse cases involve physical abuse or neglect. Close to 90% of perpetrators in child abuse cases investigated by MSF are family members involving a parent or step-parent. For elder abuse, 80% of perpetrators are the victims' family members including children and spouses.
MSF will continue to work closely with families and community partners to keep individuals safe. The Vulnerable Adults Act, which came into effect on 19 December 2018, provides an additional lever to protect vulnerable adults when families and community partners are unable to do so.
: Dr Intan.
: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Senior Parliamentary Secretary for the answer and for the data shared. The numbers are quite big. One child or one elderly victim is one too many. At this point in time, what is the extent of the effects of such abuse on, especially the young children or even the elderly victims that are held by MSF and their partners? And have the victims been able to recover from the abuse and have they managed to resume normalcy in their lives after intervention by MSF and its partners?
And my second question is: how effectively have our public campaigns been in raising awareness about familial abuse, whether to children, the elderly or even to spouses, particularly in helping the general public raise the alarm on any forms of familial abuse they know of in any family that they are aware of?
: Sir, I thank the Member for the supplementary questions. We all feel for the victims and I think, in such cases, the effects are not only on the victims. The effects also go on to carers and the perpetrators themselves. So, we look at it from a very serious perspective of how we can help the recovery stage and at the same time, we want to focus on prevention. So, family, community, they are the frontline, where we can help to prevent it from happening.
So far, those who have come forward, that we have been in touch with, we have seen that the recovery process has been quite good although not easy; and for some, quite slow. So, we have not only been looking at how we can engage the victims. We also engage the perpetrators and the carers to see how when the situation is better, really how the family can move forward along those lines.
And I am very thankful to fellow Singaporeans for responding well to our campaigns, to our calls to break the silence. Because at the end of the day, it is not only about the family alone, I think we have to play a part. And many Singaporeans have come forward, including the family members. For example, I received a message from one Singaporean who shared that one of her children has this issue and it is not only about that child. It is about the issue of inter-generational family violence that had been experienced by the great-grandfather, to the grandfather and down the line until today. So, I am very happy that because of this awareness campaign, we realise that more of them are thinking, coming forward and we have been able to help many Singaporeans.
Our awareness campaigns, for example, MSF's "Break The Silence" videos have been quite successful. We have more than 14.2 million views. As such, you see more and more people being aware, looking out for one another. And also, we have been training our stakeholders, our educators, healthcare professionals, counsellors, as well as social workers, to sharpen their tools and how they can respond and engage those who are affected by it. We also go beyond online platforms. We engage with community whereby we go down to the heartlands to engage heartlanders, residential homes, tertiary institutions and schools, to see how we can better engage them, equip them with the necessary tools to see how they can play a part.
Last year, in 2018, we have reached out to about 35,000 persons in the heartlands to equip themselves to able to address the issues. So, we will continue to do more and we feel that it is each and everyone's responsibility to play a part so that we can take care of our children and also ensure that our elderly can grow and have graceful senior years in Singapore.
: I thank the Senior Parliamentary Secretary for the reply. I just like to know whether, for the past three years, is the trend upwards or downwards, in terms of number of cases being reported? Has it been increasing for the past years or reducing?
: Sir, I thank the Member for the question. Because of our effort to increase the awareness and also sharpen the tools with regards to those who are involved in this area, people are able to identify cases easily and bring forward anything they find not right with regards to how the victims are responding. So, we can see an increasing trend. Nevertheless, we want to make sure that, as a whole, while we increase the awareness, we also make sure that families are able to provide a better environment for their children and the elders.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources (a) what are the median, lowest and highest rental fees for hawker stalls managed by NEA and social enterprises respectively; and (b) whether the Ministry can provide the breakdown, in percentage terms, of the operating expenses for hawker stalls operated under these two different management models.
: The stall rentals at the seven new hawker centres managed by the Socially-conscious Enterprises range from $750 to $3,700 a month. The median rental is $2,000 per month. This is in line with the median rental of stalls in comparable existing hawker centres at $1,700 per month, after accounting for the larger stall size, better-designed stalls and amenities at the new centres. The rentals of non-subsidised stalls at comparable existing centres range from $640 to $3,900 a month.
Besides rental, stallholders in all hawker centres have similar types of ancillary costs, such as Service and Conservancy Charges (S&CC) and table-cleaning fees, as part of their business operations. These costs are comparable at both new and existing centres. For example, the S&CC at the new centres are between $110 and $350 a month, which is within the range of $130 to $450 a month at our existing centres. Table-cleaning fees at the new centres are between $300 and $550 a month, which is also within the range of $200 to $830 a month at our existing centres.
Table cleaning services do not cover washing of dishes. Unlike stallholders in the majority of existing centres, stallholders in the new centres have access to centralised dishwashing (CDW) services and thus enjoy manpower and utilities savings. CDW services also enhance the cleanliness of the hawker centres and the rate of table turnover, which benefit both hawkers and patrons. Stallholders can focus on their cooking as they need not worry about hiring assistants to wash their crockeries. On the other hand, stallholders without access to centralised dishwashing may have to hire dishwashers which could cost up to $1,500 a month, not to mention that these hawkers often have difficulties hiring and retaining such hawker assistants.
In November last year, we explained in the House on the need for hawkers to be more productive. This is to overcome the labour constraints that the hawkers will increasingly face, and can go a long way in sustaining our hawker trade to serve the needs of Singaporeans. To help the hawkers in new centres better manage costs, we are extending the Productive Hawker Centre (PHC) grants to them. From 1 January this year, the stallholders will see a 50% reduction in their CDW costs for the first year and 30% for the second year.
As for other operating expenses incurred directly by stallholders such as utilities, manpower and raw materials, these would vary from stall to stall depending on factors such as the nature of business and market conditions.
: Order. End of Question Time. Ministerial Statement. Minister for Defence.
[
Pursuant to Standing Order No 22(3), Written Answers to Question Nos 39, 41-43, 47-64, 66-67, 70, 72-75 and 77 on the Order Paper are reproduced in the Appendix. Question Nos 38, 40, 44-46, 65, 68-69, 71, 76 and 78 have been postponed to the sitting of Parliament on 12 February 2019
.]
: Mr Speaker, before I begin my Statement, allow me on behalf of all Members in this House, to offer our deepest condolences to the family of the late CFC(NS) Aloysius Pang. There was an outpouring of sympathy from Singaporeans all across the island on CFC(NS) Pang's passing as we shared the grief of the family's tragic loss. I pray that the passage of time will bring some comfort to the Pang family as well as to the other families affected by the recent deaths of national servicemen. Your questions today as Members of Parliament (MPs) are an important part of holding MINDEF and the SAF accountable for the safety of our servicemen, and will strengthen our collective resolve to make SAF training as safe as possible, and prevent such tragic deaths from occurring again.
My Statement today will cover three areas: first, the death of CFC(NS) Aloysius Pang; second, the Committee of Inquiry (COI) findings of CFC Liu Kai; and third, safety enhancements by the SAF following recent NS training deaths.
Let me first address questions from Members on CFC(NS) Pang who died on 23 January this year. A Committee of Inquiry has been convened by the Armed Forces Council (AFC) on 25 January 2019. All five members of the COI are from outside MINDEF and the SAF. They comprise the chairperson who is a judge nominated by the State Courts, a consultant medical specialist, a member nominated by the External Review Panel on SAF Safety (ERPSS), a member of the Workplace Safety and Health Council and a senior-ranked National Serviceman.
The COI has started its investigation to determine the circumstances and contributory factors which led to the demise of CFC(NS) Pang. When completed, the COI will submit its findings to the Armed Forces Council and the ERPSS. The ERPSS will in turn provide its comments on findings and both their comments and the findings will be made public.
However, as CFC(NS) Pang's death occurred in New Zealand, neither the Police Force nor the State Coroner have jurisdiction for deaths outside Singapore. Investigations to determine any culpability in this case will be left to the SAF's Special Investigation Branch (SIB) which has jurisdiction under military law.
Based on SIB's investigations, the Chief Military Prosecutor will decide if any servicemen are to be prosecuted for criminal or military offences in a military court. The military court is presided over by the State Court judges appointed as Presidents of the General Court Martial.
In this Statement, I will give as much information as possible without prejudicing the COI and SIB's investigations, whose findings in due course will be authoritative and conclusive. To preserve the integrity of the process, I will only state facts in reply to Parliamentary Questions (PQs) and consciously not draw any inferences or conclusions on the incident involving CFC(NS) Pang. I ask Members here to observe the same. We should also be mindful of the need to be sensitive to the family's feelings as we honour the memory of CFC(NS) Pang. With these caveats, let me begin.
CFC(NS) Aloysius Pang, aged 28, an Armament Technician, was participating in Exercise Thunder Warrior at Waiouru Training Area in New Zealand this year.
On 19 January this year, three SAF personnel were in the cabin of the Singapore Self-Propelled Howitzer (SSPH) to carry out repair works on the gun's calibration system for accurate firing. The three SAF personnel were CFC(NS) Pang, a Regular Armament Technician holding the rank of Military Expert (ME)2 with more than 16 years in service, and third, the Gun Detachment Commander, who is a Third Sergeant NSman.
Mr Speaker, I have asked for your permission to display some slides. Can I ask for the first slide to be displayed?
: Please proceed. [
Slides were shown to hon Members. Please refer to
Annex 1
.
]
: Thank you. Let me orientate Members to first of all the cabin of the SSPH. The cabin is 2.3 metres in height, 2.44 metres from front to rear, and 2.64 metres from side to side. That gives you the dimensions of the cabin within. The gun barrel, which, on the left-hand side of the screen is now in the inclined position and therefore is lowered in the rear, divides the cabin into two. There is space for the three persons within the cabin to occupy positions on either side of the gun as shown in the diagram – 1, 2 and 3, and looking towards the SSPH from the back, about 1.55 metres on the left side, Safe Position 1 and 2; and 0.9 metres in width on the right side, Safe Position 3. These so-called Safe Positions are designed to be occupied by the gun commander, the ammo loader and charge loaders, but for the purpose of the Statement, I will refer to them as "safe positions".
The gun barrel is usually tilted upwards for firing – that is the picture shown on the top, smaller picture on the left; the gun barrel at the inclined position with the gun pointed up. The gun barrel is usually tilted upwards for firing but needs to be lowered for some types of maintenance work. When the gun is lowered, the flick rammer at the rear end of the barrel goes up and ends about 10 cm below the top rim of the cabin. I will have some more pictures to make it more clear later. Because of this, no one should be behind the barrel when the gun is being lowered. Unfortunately, CFC(NS) Pang was caught between the gun barrel and the interior of the SSPH as the gun barrel was lowered and sustained compression injuries to his chest and abdomen.
After he sustained these injuries, CFC(NS) Pang was treated on-site by the SAF Medical Officer and evacuated to Waiouru Camp Medical Centre. He was heli-evacuated to Waikato hospital in Hamilton, New Zealand, which is a regional trauma centre, where surgeons decided that he needed an operation to treat his injuries. Prior to his first surgery, CFC(NS) Pang was conscious and speaking. At the first operation, the surgical team found that a number of organs were damaged and treated them accordingly. After the first surgery, CFC(NS) Pang did not require any ventilation and his vital signs were stable. In fact, after the first surgery, he spoke with his mother who had been flown over to New Zealand.
A "second-look" surgery had been planned for CFC(NS) Pang on 21 January 2019, two days after the first surgery. According to the surgeons there, this was to detect further injuries, as damage from compression injuries may only show up later. No further damage was discovered at the second-look surgery, but despite this, CFC(NS) Pang's condition subsequently deteriorated. Despite being placed on artificial life support and further treatment, CFC(NS) Pang passed away on 23 January 2019, four days after the primary incident in the SSPH.
I propose now to deal with Members' questions which fall in three broad categories: first, what was the experience and state of the maintenance crew? I have the second slide. CFC(NS) Pang had arrived in New Zealand on 6 January 2019 and had begun maintenance work from 10 January 2019. So, on 6 January, he arrived; he began maintenance work on 10 January. This was CFC(NS) Pang’s seventh In-Camp Training (ICT). He had been trained to perform maintenance and repair for the SSPH since he was a full-time national serviceman. In addition, during his previous ICT in February 2018, he had attended a two-day refresher Maintenance Vocation Training on the basic functional checks and troubleshooting for the SSPH. That course also included safety procedures during gun movements. Before participating in Exercise Thunder Warrior this year, CFC(NS) Pang had undergone refresher training on maintenance tasks in New Zealand. For this exercise, CFC(NS) Pang was involved in the preparation of more than 10 SSPHs, which included servicing and maintaining of the guns. The other two servicemen were also similarly qualified. The Gun Commander was in his eighth ICT and had undergone refresher training prior to his deployment in the exercise. The Regular technician has eight years of working experience on the SSPH and it was his sixth time participating as a technician in Exercise Thunder Warrior.
Let me explain how maintenance work on the SSPH is conducted when the unit is deployed in the field. There are two levels of maintenance support – basic and higher. Basic support is provided by the SSPH battalion's organic Forward Maintenance Platoon, made up of national servicemen. CFC(NS) Aloysius Pang was part of this Forward Maintenance Platoon. If the repair works exceed the scope of the Forward Maintenance Platoon, more complex maintenance is requested from and performed by technicians in the higher maintenance echelon, and this is called the Forward Support Group, who are made up of Regulars. So, basic support made up of national servicemen, more complex maintenance made up of Regulars in the Forward Support Group.
In this particular incident, CFC(NS) Pang was first activated. But as he was unable to resolve the fault, CFC(NS) Pang requested and received the help of Regular technicians from the Forward Support Group. CFC(NS) Pang and one Regular technician of ME2 rank were inside the cabin of the SSPH with the Gun Commander, a Third Sergeant NSman, when the incident happened. These are the three persons I referenced in the beginning of my Statement.
Second, the adequacy of safety protocols and whether the maintenance crew were familiar with them during this ICT. A number of Members of Parliament have asked for this, Miss Cheryl Chan Wei Ling, Prof Fatimah Lateef, Mr Darryl David, Miss Cheng Li Hui, Mr Dennis Tan Lip Fong and Ms Joan Pereira. Let me show a third slide. I will focus on the relevant safety instructions during maintenance work, because this is the reason for the presence of these three people in the SSPH, and in particular when the gun is lowered. There are safety procedures taught to all maintenance and SSPH operating crew. The ME2 regular technician is overall in charge because he comes from the Forward Support Group and he is in charge of more complex repair works – so he is in charge. For the repair work in this case, the maintenance manual indicates that it is the responsibility of the technician in charge to ensure that the gun has been lowered and fixed in place before any maintenance works can begin.
Further, the safety instructions specify safe positions within the SSPH cabin for soldiers to occupy during the gun lowering, as well as safety precautions to be taken. In operations or during maintenance, it is the Gun Commander who lowers the gun. From his Safe Position 1, indicated in the middle of this slide, the picture of the tank with the gun pointing forward or pointing up, the Gun Commander must first check to ensure that the gun barrel area is free from obstacles and that no persons are in the travel path of the barrel.
The other persons in the cabin are to occupy Safe Positions 2 or 3, on the left side and the right side respectively. The Gun Commander then gives the signal "clear away", "clear away" to warn the technicians about the barrel movement. He should visually check to ensure no persons are in the travel path of the barrel and all crew are in Safe Positions. After which, the gun commander should shout "standby" before moving the barrel. In the event of any danger, there are also three emergency stop buttons in each of the safe positions inside the SSPH and they are indicated as the red buttons in each of the Safe Positions. There are three of them.
In the operators' manual, there is a standard warning, and I quote it, it is boxed in the Safety Manuals, printed in bold, quote, "Failure to observe the above warnings, may result in serious injury or death to crew". The warning is repeated for a variety of drills that the SSPH crew must undertake.
Next, I will show a video of this safety drill prescribed during the gun lowering – and it will be shown in actual speed, with your permission, Mr Speaker. [
A video was shown to hon Members. Please refer to
Annex 2
.]
It takes about nine seconds for the gun to be lowered to the horizontal position for maintenance. All three persons who were in the cabin in this incident had been trained specifically on the SSPH and had conducted similar maintenance on it in the past. During this exercise, both CFC(NS) Pang and the Regular technician had conducted maintenance works on the guns daily.
Following the incident, the SAF's immediate task was to ensure that there was no systemic machine malfunction of the SSPH, which would otherwise have put maintenance crews at risk. Inspections of the SSPH have not detected any machine malfunction of the gun lowering mechanism.
Third, was there a design flaw of the SSPH? Member Assoc Prof Daniel Goh asked this. The SSPH was designed and developed to international military standards for System Safety and Human Factor Engineering. Many other militaries operate tracked 155mm guns with similar gun lowering mechanisms, this includes the United States, South Korea and Germany. The SSPH prototype platform underwent extensive trials and evaluations from Year 2000 to 2002 before its introduction in 2003.
So, it has been in operation for the last 15 years. Over the last 15 years, more than 1,000 national servicemen and Regulars have been trained to operate the SSPH, and about 12,500 rounds fired. There has not been any reported injury of servicemen due to the gun lowering for maintenance, or operating in or firing of the SSPH.
I have stated the facts that MINDEF/SAF are aware of, in reply to Members' questions. They include Mr Christopher de Souza, Mr Pritam Singh and Er Dr Lee Bee Wah. We must now leave it to the independent five-member COI led by the State Court judge to determine the factors which led to the death of CFC(NS) Pang. The COI has full access to material and witnesses to determine the facts for themselves. For avoidance of doubt, let me reiterate that the COI need not take into account anything in my Statement in Parliament today.
Everything asked for by the COI will be released to them. I do not foresee needing to withhold any information for security reasons. The COI will also make specific recommendations to rectify any systemic or human lapses found. In the meantime, the two other servicemen deployed from have been re-deployed from their operational roles. We owe it to CFC(NS) Pang and his family, indeed to all Singaporeans, to get to the bottom of what happened, and make things right, to ensure the safety of the NS training system as a whole. I ask that all of us respect these objective and impartial processes that are underway, to reserve our judgement and wait for the conclusions of the COI, which will be presented in Parliament subsequently.
Let me now share the COI's findings on CFC Liu who died on 3 November 2018 after a Bionix reversed into a Land Rover of which he was the driver. As explained earlier in the House, the COI is enabled and governed by the SAF Act. Its mandate is fact finding and not to determine culpability of individuals.
To determine culpability, separate and independent from the COI, Police investigations are on-going. Thereafter the Attorney-General's Chambers (AGC) will decide if any persons should be prosecuted. Internally, MINDEF will conduct its own investigations and may charge persons who breach military law in the Military Court, even if the AGC does not file criminal charges.
The COI of CFC Liu Kai will take into account findings from these various judicial processes before finalising its report.
On 3 November 2018, the 42nd Battalion Singapore Armoured Regiment (42 SAR) was conducting a two-sided company mission exercise at the Jalan Murai training area. As with all such exercises, a Regular trainer of Captain rank from the Active Unit Training Centre was assigned to evaluate the exercise troops. The trainer used a Land Rover whose driver was CFC Liu, a Transport Operator.
Let me orientate Members to the Bionix's crew.
[
Slides were shown to hon Members. Please refer to
Annex 3
.
] This is the Bionix and the crew comprises four persons. For this particular incident, a full-time national serviceman who was in the position of the vehicle commander (Second Lieutenant), a rear guide when the vehicle reverses, he was the Third Sergeant NSF, the driver and the gunner who were both Corporals.
The COI determined that the servicemen involved were qualified to participate in the exercise having undergone the requisite training for their roles. On 2 November 2018 the trainer met the Bionix vehicle commander to understand their manoeuvre plan for the next day’s exercise. The COI was of the view that the servicemen involved had had their rest in accordance to the Training Safety Regulations (TSR), and that their mental and physical states were fit for participation in the activity and did not appear to have an effect on their attention to safety protocols.
The COI also found that the Land Rover that CFC Liu was driving was serviceable.
The Land Rover has two cameras – one that records events in front of the vehicle and the second that records events inside the cabin of the Land Rover. The COI was able to piece together a detailed chronology from these camera recordings and statements from multiple witnesses. I will bring Members through the events in detail by showing a series of graphics.
[
Please refer to
Annex 4
.
]
The exercise started on the morning of 3 November 2018 at 7 o'clock. CFC Liu and the trainer were in the Land Rover following their assigned Bionix. At around 9.58, the Bionix crew spotted several vehicles passing by at the junction ahead of it and stopped the Bionix, as ordered by the vehicle commander. Responding to this, the Land Rover driven by CFC Liu also stopped.
The COI found that the trainer had instructed CFC Liu to move the Land Rover forward to overtake the Bionix. Just as CFC Liu started to move forward slowly, shots were fired as part of the exercise. Upon hearing the gunshots, CFC Liu stopped the Land Rover behind the Bionix and based on the COI's calculations, this final position of the Land Rover would have been at a distance of "at most 19.8m from the Bionix, but short of the safety distance of 30m stated in the Training Safety Regulations (TSR)."
Four seconds after the Land Rover had stopped, the Bionix started to reverse as part of the extrication drill ordered by the Bionix vehicle commander, in responding to the shots. Let me explain a little bit about extrication drills. How well and quickly armour combat crews can extricate themselves when fired upon, can make a big difference as to whether they survive an enemy onslaught or are captured or destroyed. The COI acknowledged the need for this type of training, even though it is high risk.
The Bionix as part of the prescribed drill had to reverse so that its guns could continue to fire forward at the enemy. As the driver of the Bionix is unable to see behind him or behind the vehicle, the rear guide directs the driver in reversing the vehicle. You remember the picture I showed the Bionix with the driver in front – he can see forward. It is the rear guide who must guide him in reversing. As the Bionix reversed, the Land Rover was initially not in its path. The COI found that the Bionix had "drifted" in reversing and the driver made a slight steer to correct this drift. This steer brought the Land Rover into the path of the Bionix. The COI did not find any mechanical problems with the Bionix's steering equipment.
Almost immediately after the Bionix started reversing, the video recordings from the Land Rover's front facing camera show the Third Sergeant rear guide of the Bionix, quote, "gesturing at the Land Rover to move away and then pushing the mic of his helmet closer to his mouth". The COI found that the rear guide issued stop commands into the intercom of his helmet set when the Bionix started reversing and did so repeatedly. The intercom of the helmet is the rear guide’s only means of communication with the other crew members in the Bionix. However, the Bionix continued to reverse.
The video recording of the interior of the Land Rover cabin showed the Captain trainer tapping CFC Liu and signalling him to reverse the Land Rover. From the beeping sounds, it also indicated that CFC Liu did engage the reverse gear. Both the trainer and CFC Liu also shouted and gestured with their hands for the Bionix to stop and the trainer also attempted to reach for the handset of the radio set to communicate with the Bionix crew.
Approximately eight seconds after it started reversing, the Bionix collided into the Land Rover and mounted the driver's side before coming to a stop. The trainer could extricate himself but CFC Liu remained trapped. The trainer notified the Conducting Officer of the exercise who immediately ordered the exercise to cease.
A medic on board a nearby Bionix immediately tended to CFC Liu. The SAF Emergency Ambulance Service (EAS), unit medical officer and Singapore Civil Defence Force (SCDF) were activated and arrived on site. Unfortunately, CFC Liu succumbed to his injuries. He was pronounced dead by the unit medical officer on site at around 1035 hours. The cause of death as determined by post-mortem was traumatic asphyxia.
The COI noted that the rear guide had repeatedly given the order for the driver to stop reversing through the intercom via his helmet. The COI noted that the intercom system was working earlier in the exercise. The COI has asked for an independent technical assessment report on whether the intercom system was working properly all the time. In parallel, Police investigations too are also focused on the communications between the Bionix crew and whether this was affected by the equipment. This is, of course, an important point that needs to be resolved but we will have to await the outcome of the Police investigations.
The COI made several findings in their report: first, the COI noted that ensuring the safety distance is the responsibility of the vehicle commander of the Land Rover. In this case, the Land Rover ended up in a position that was less than the required safety distance from the Bionix; second, the reversing of the Bionix from the simulated enemy encounter brought the Land Rover into the path of the Bionix.
The COI found that a safety management plan was included as part of the exercise, and in line with standard practice. The COI also found there was adequate deployment of medics and medical equipment as part of this plan for medical response.
I now share the ERPSS' written report on the COI findings, and it will be distributed to Members, with the Speaker's permission, and be public subsequently. [
Handouts were distributed to hon Members. Please refer to
Annex 5
.
]
To summarise the report, they agreed with the COI's findings on the incident and proposed improvements that could be made to the safety management, emergency response system and combat vehicle safety, and the details are in the report. Much of what the ERPSS commented, I have already outlined in my Ministerial Statement.
It will now be up to the AGC to decide if there are grounds to prosecute any person in the criminal Courts for the death of CFC Liu Kai. If no criminal charges are filed, MINDEF will take disciplinary measures for lapses identified in this incident in our military court. We will update Members and the public on these disciplinary measures. In the meantime, the servicemen involved in this incident have been re-deployed to non-operational roles.
Mr Speaker, CFC Liu Kai was a well-liked and respected soldier. He served with pride and was remembered by his peers for his dedication and commitment. We mourn the loss of this precious son. And we hope that the measures the SAF has put in place will prevent a similar incident in the future.
And these are questions that Members, including Mr Desmond Choo, have asked. In response to the COI's findings and its own internal review, the following measures have or will be put in place by the SAF.
First, in addition to the existing emergency horn (e-horn) activation button in the front for the vehicle commander, two more e-horn buttons have been installed in the rear of all Bionix vehicles used for training. So, before the incident there was one in front; now two more have been put in the rear of the Bionix for training vehicles. This is to sound the alarm in the event of an intercom failure.
Second, from March this year, rear-view cameras will be progressively installed into our training fleet of Bionix vehicles, so that the driver can see during reversing. The Army will study if these new features – the safety horns and the camera, the rear-view camera – ought to be incorporated for the operational vehicles as well. All heavy-wheeled vehicles, such as five-tonners, will also be progressively installed with rear-view cameras and mirrors to reduce blind spots.
Third, as with live firing exercises, the Army will also now conduct safety Table Top Exercises for all high risk non-live firing exercises before the actual execution. I think some Members asked about this. This includes familiarisation with emergency measures and evacuation plans.
Fourth, more experienced Regulars have been added as trainers.
Fifth, starting from March this year, medics will upgrade their skills in resuscitation and handling of emergencies through attachments to hospital emergency departments or ambulances.
Sixth, vehicle and equipment serviceability will be improved based on recommendations of the external panel.
Finally, with regard to the safety distance between vehicles. In an exercise area, vehicles are used for a variety of administrative, safety and training purposes. The current distance of 30 metres was prescribed after evaluation and tests and in general, assessed to be adequate for safety and still allow supporting elements to be responsive to events on the ground. But where vehicles have to reverse such as in extrication drills, the Army has put in new measures to enhance safety.
First, trainers will no longer travel in Land Rovers but will join exercise troops in the combat vehicles during high risk training.
Second, for all reversing manoeuvres including extrication drills, the driver can only move the vehicle backwards with the explicit clearance of the rear guide. These two measures, together with the extra emergency horn buttons, will enhance safety and still allow armour units to practise extrication drills. Further, the Army will ensure that only essential vehicles are allowed into the exercise area to minimise the risk of accidents.
Apart from these specific measures, in response to the recent NS deaths, the SAF has decided that for the safety system as a whole, a dedicated unit will be set up at the highest level to drive and supervise a safety culture and enforcement against slack practices. This move also responds to ERPSS finding that while the safety policies and management systems of the SAF are largely in place, there was a need for more compliance checks and ground level audits.
In line with this objective, the SAF will undertake the following systemic measures:
The current Safety and Systems Review Directorate (SSRD) will be expanded and elevated to an Inspector-General Office under the Chief of Defence Force (CDF) to oversee all Services. The Office will be headed by the SAF Inspector-General. The Chief of Staff-Joint Staff (COS-JS), which is an existing appointment of a Service Chief equivalent, will concurrently be the Inspector-General. This dual function is synergistic as the COS-JS has an overview of all operations and as Inspector-General, will have the authority to ensure that Safety First habits and processes are incorporated at all levels of training. More safety officers will be deployed to assist individual units and supervise training activities. There will be more safety audits of units by inspection teams in the Services and supervised by the Inspector-General Office (IGO).
Second, commanders of units which do not meet standards and have committed lapses in safety procedures and processes will have this marked against them in their performance reviews. Let me emphasise that such commanders will be deemed to have performed unsatisfactorily even if accidents have not occurred. This is the right emphasis to prevent accidents.
In the past few weeks, the CDF reduced the tempo for every unit to review its processes, and to emphasise to the troops a safety consciousness to protect themselves and their buddies. Units that are on live operations such as those protecting key installations are not affected by this measure and will continue to be vigilant. Basic types of training have resumed since 7 February. Individual units will continue to be audited and will resume realistic training when safety processes are assessed to be in place.
Some Members – Mr Darryl David, Mr Chong Kee Hiong and Mr Leon Perera – have asked if external agencies review our system to detect root issues. The ERPSS, which consists of prominent safety experts and professionals outside the SAF, is tasked primarily with this mission. The SAF's safety system is aligned to international frameworks and regulations, such as the Occupational Health and Safety System framework (OHSAS 18001). It comprises: rules that mitigate safety risks in the conduct of all training; processes and training to build up competency of our servicemen and to make sure that the rules are properly applied; inspections and reporting mechanisms to ensure that the rules are followed; and consequences if they are not followed.
Quite a few Members – Prof Fatimah Lateef, Miss Cheng Li Hui, Ms Joan Pereira and Miss Cheryl Chan – have asked even with safety instructions are adequately in place, how do we ensure that national servicemen are familiar and safety conscious. It is an important question. And also if the SAF has taken into account the abrupt switch from civilian environment to military training where there are much larger and potentially dangerous equipment. Another good question.
These are important issues that need to be factored into our safety systems. One suggestion has been to outsource all maintenance work with heavy vehicles or machinery. This is not possible. Complex maintenance tasks that require specialised tools and equipment are already outsourced. But we still need national servicemen technicians to be with their units to perform basic maintenance so that their equipment can function during operations.
We do cater time for NSmen soldiers to adjust from their civilian settings. Before any activity commences, a safety brief is held and inspections conducted to check that soldiers are in good physical state, and that vehicles and equipment are serviceable. Soldiers must also complete an individual risk assessment checklist and raise safety concerns to their superiors for mitigation before any activity begins.
NS training is conducted progressively starting with refresher training for individual skills and proficiencies before any operations are conducted. Prior to their deployment, further training, such as with a simulator, is conducted. I think one Member asked about this.
The IGO will review if further mitigating measures are needed to help NSmen adjust from civilian life to in-camp training.
Members have asked, and this includes a question from Member Er Dr Lee Bee Wah, if we punish safety lapses, even when they do not lead to injury. Over the past three years, an average of 2% of servicemen a year was punished under the SAF Act for safety lapses – 2 %. Their punishments ranged from a fine to detention and administrative penalties such as delays in promotion and reduction in benefits.
At the same time, we reward servicemen who demonstrate safe behaviour. Units and individuals are recognised during the Service’s respective annual Safety Day. Member Mr Mohamed Irshad enquired about this.
If we are to achieve zero fatalities during NS training, we must have a strong safety culture in all our units and safety consciousness down to the last soldier. Commanders and supervisors must lead by example to emphasise safety and all commanders undergo safety training, and must know that safety lapses will affect their performance review. Safety Officers who are former senior commanders help ensure the safe conduct of training. Experienced Regular trainers partner the national servicemen commanders to design training and safety plans. Soldiers must have a strong respect for safety rules, take care of one another and speak out on safety concerns. Incentives and disincentives must be aligned to achieve the right safety outcomes. Our safety system must weed out unsafe practices, even when they do not lead to accidents. This was a point, I think, in the question of Member Ms Irene Quay Siew Ching.
Individual soldiers are encouraged to report unsafe practices and risky behaviour to their superiors without fear of reprisal, or regardless of rank, to call for an immediate stop to training. We do not reward, nor should signal that we reward adventurous behaviour. And this is in the Training Safety Regulations. So, let me quote it in full. It is in chapter 1, section 2, paragraph 11: "Anyone who spots a safety breach or unsafe practice can call for an immediate stop to it, rectify when possible and report to the Conducting Officer. Once notified, the Conducting Officer should verify the report and when necessary rectify the safety breach or unsafe practice. The Conducting Officer must update the Supervising Officer on the measures taken to rectify the safety breach or unsafe practice."
Anyone who spots the safety breach, not only commanders, but anyone.
Servicemen can also report safety incidents and near-misses through a 24-hour safety hotline. This safety hotline receives about 140 calls a year.
Ultimately, safety is both a command and individual responsibility and everyone needs to play their part because precious lives depend on it. It is not true that we cannot train safely if we want to train realistically.
If we have a strong safety culture and safety systems, it will give soldiers greater confidence to train hard and realistically. SAF commanders are convinced that it can be done, and these measures I have outlined today, will lead us to that goal of zero training fatalities.
Mr Speaker, the loss of any soldier is devastating. It leaves a void that cannot be filled in the lives of family members and friends, and its impact is deep and far-reaching. It will take much time for their grief to run its course.
Members Ms Anthea Ong and Mr Chong Kee Hiong have asked about assistance when a death occurs. Within the SAF dedicated grief counsellors are assigned to provide support to the serviceman’s family members in the aftermath of their loss. For our soldiers, a team of psychologists, counsellors and psychiatrists are deployed to assist unit commanders and servicemen in their recovery from the stress in such incidents. MINDEF does take the families' request into consideration when deploying a deceased serviceman's immediate family members during their NS.
Over the past 17 months, four national servicemen have passed away during training. In 2012, the SAF also experienced four training fatalities that year. But from 2013 to 2016, we had none. How did this turnaround occur? This was probably due to multiple factors, but I think the new safety measures we put into place after the devastating incidents of 2012 had an effect. If we put our minds and efforts to achieve zero training fatalities, it can be achieved.
Four families have experienced much sorrow after their irreplaceable loss these past months. Singapore has lost precious sons. As deep as the hurt, as great the loss, we must not forget why we suffer them. When the founding generation pledged themselves to build a strong SAF, they were fully conscious that a strong military is only possible with fully committed national servicemen drawn from every family in Singapore. They knew the costs and sacrifice that would be required. Not only in resources that we invest in at every Budget, but much more precious would be the time, the sweat, the tears, even the lives of precious sons.
Inherently, military training poses risk. On any given day within the SAF, thousands of national servicemen train hard, amid moving tonnes of steel, bullets, munitions and other explosives. Why do our national servicemen do it? They do it to protect Singapore. Because without national servicemen, we cannot have an SAF or the Home Team that can deter terrorists from attacking Changi Airport or Jurong or harming innocent civilians in shopping malls and crowded places. Without national servicemen and the SAF, potential aggressors would not shy away from simply marching into and occupying today’s affluent Singapore, as Iraq did to Kuwait. Without a strong defence, our air and shipping routes in and out of Singapore could easily be blocked – as Qatar now faces. These are not imaginary security threats that our national servicemen train for but real – they have happened elsewhere and can occur to Singapore too.
We must never give up on National Service that forms the backbone of our SAF for national defence. This imperative of National Service and our national defence does not absolve or reduce the accountability of MINDEF and the SAF in any way, to ensure safe training. On the contrary, it compels MINDEF and the SAF to do all that is humanly possible to prevent training deaths for national servicemen because precious sons have been entrusted to us by their families. MINDEF and the SAF will hold ourselves accountable for every single national serviceman entrusted to us. I am deeply sorry for the loss of four precious national servicemen in the last 17 months. The SAF will strengthen its safety systems. Even as we honour those who died in service of our country, we must soldier on, to build a strong defence, to protect Singapore and to protect every national serviceman during training. Thank you, Speaker.
: I thank the Minister for his comprehensive response and Ministerial Statement. I have three supplementary questions.
With regard to the safety timeout called this time for CFC(NS) Aloysius Pang, how does this compare to the length of time of safety timeout called for previous training incidents, and whether there were any reasons for calling for a longer or shorter timeout?
I also understand that from 7 February, the safety timeout is progressively being lifted. With the time that has passed since the incident and the timeout was originally called for, I do hope that the SAF and the commanders will also observe as much safety precautions as possible as men catch up on the training that they have missed out during this period of time.
The second question is with regard to further assuring Singaporean parents. CFC(NS) Aloysius Pang was my resident. Fellow residents in my constituency knew him well. Over the course of the last few weeks, as I visited families in their flats as we held gatherings, many parents have come up to me and asked about safety, about reassurances for their children. But what I am heartened by is that none of the parents that have spoken to me have ever said we should do away with National Service. Many of them prefaced their statement by saying that we have also served and we know that the SAF takes safety seriously. But with four recent incidents, they are worried. So, how do we reassure them that safety is paramount, that their children will be taken care of.
Lastly, I welcome Minister's announcement that rear-view cameras, reverse cameras, will be installed in the Bionix as well as the five-tonners. I was previously with the Transport Section of the 328th Battalion Singapore Combat Engineers. I looked after the five-tonners as well as other transport equipment. These equipment are huge. Although we go through vigorous training and we ensure that there is always a vehicle commander or a safety officer to ensure that when we reverse these vehicles, there are occasions where lapses do occur and minor accidents do happen, fortunately not involving human lives.
So, I do ask if the SAF will consider installing these cameras in all our SAF vehicles eventually, so that it includes an additional safety element for the driver on top of all the other safety features, as well as the vehicle commander and safety officers that we already practise today.
: Mr Speaker, let me take the questions in turn.
How different is this timeout from previous timeout? It is significantly different. Previously, there was a period and then units would revert back to their original activity. But as the Member rightly pointed out, after four deaths, old practices must be changed. You must start with the basis that there might be something wrong and look for that factor, whatever that factor is, and that is just a precaution.
So, the difference is units on operations carry on. We had a period of safety timeout but it has been lifted only for certain activities. More complex ones, more high-risk ones, CDF and his commanders want to be satisfied that not only are the training safety regulations in place, but that there is adequate behaviour, adequate culture in that unit, before you undertake them; and I fully support that. So, there is not as if after a certain period, behaviours will automatically correct.
Rear-view cameras for all vehicles. Intuitively and in principle, it makes sense. But as you can well imagine, the SAF runs platforms of various generations. In fact, the most recent generations, the Terrexes, even our Leopard tanks, have rear-view cameras. But you inherit a long tail and the Bionix was in operation since, I think, the 1990s. With this incident, we decided that we will do it for training vehicles; we are reviewing if we should also do it for operational. So, I would say, in principle, yes, but there are other considerations. But, in principle, I think that is what we want to do and, certainly, as I said, for those that need to reverse, that are reversing, we will put in not only rear-view cameras but mirrors to reduce blind spots.
There was another question of reassurance of parents. How do you reassure parents that their sons will be safe? And I am glad what the Member Mr Alex Yam has said, that no parent has come to him to say they want to do away with NS. The parents want to know that you are doing your level best, and that you will pay attention. Singaporeans are reasonable, they know that we want to train.
But let me give you another perspective as well. In these two incidents and a number of incidents that I shared in this House. I shared with you the incident of Gavin Chan, who was training overseas as well when his Bionix overturned. And I gave you the findings of the COI. When asked by his crew to switch on the headlights, he said "We should not do it. It would give our position away to the enemy". In the case of Dave Lee, the heatstroke, he pushed himself beyond what he was able. In this case, Liu Kai, they wanted to be realistic, extrication drills.
We have come very far when national servicemen say, "I want to train as realistically as I can". What if we had the reverse situation where everyone attends training but nobody trains? I think we have to take what is good in our system and respond practically. The results must be the ultimate comfort for parents. We will do as much as we can practically each time our COIs tell us there is a lapse or a weakness that needs to be addressed, but I need at every level a safety consciousness, a safety culture. And I tell you, it does not come overnight and may not come even after many years, to raise the level of safety culture.
I had been the Minister for Manpower, and you will remember the particular period, the Nicoll Highway collapse, the Fusionopolis incident, the COIs that we had. In order to strengthen our system, we went overseas to the Nordic countries, to some European countries, which have higher standards than us. They told me a very interesting example of a particular bridge that was built by two Nordic countries. I will not name them because there are implications which will be explained once I have shared. Two Nordic countries building a bridge to connect the two. Same specifications, they will meet in the middle. One country had half the number of deaths and injuries of the other country. All comes down to culture. And who decides the culture? It is all of us, our children, our friends, our relatives.
I have said very clearly and in no uncertain terms that anyone can stop unsafe training. If you think it is unsafe for your buddies, for yourself, raise it. If you think that somebody is pushing beyond his means to physical harm, do so. I think, that way, we maintain realistic training and give comfort to our parents.
: I thank the Minister for his answers. The Minister mentioned that for the commanders of units where there are some safety breaches, there will be a mark on their record. Can I ask the Minister at what level would this be? Would it be at the battalion level, the brigade, or the division, formation level?
Related to this, I note that the NS training deaths in recent years have involved different vocations, different formation and command. I think in some of these cases where disciplinary actions have been taken, they were taken against junior or mid-level commanders. Moreover, each COI usually does not go beyond the remit of that particular incident in question. So, at what point and at what stage would the Government think that it would be necessary to send a signal to the entire Force when they recognise that there may be a problem at the systemic or a greater level requiring a senior officer, whether at formation, army, SAF or beyond, to take responsibility on this?
I say this, bearing in mind some examples from overseas. In 2013, a Taiwanese conscript died after being physically punished by his superiors. Four officers were charged and the Defence Minister was also quick to take responsibility. In 2017, the US Pacific Seventh Fleet commander was relieved of his command after four accidents involving the Seventh Fleet. The reason given was that there was a loss of confidence in his ability to command. At the same time, while each of these four incidents is unique, they cannot be viewed in isolation – that was the reason given. Also, the US Navy went on to say that there will be a deliberate reset of all the ships, focus on navigation, mechanical systems and bridge resource management.
: Mr Speaker, there are two main questions, one for commanders with safety lapses. As I have said, even those that do not lead to accidents will affect their performance review, and so that signal is quite clear. How high should you go up? I think we want to be careful that we do what we think works and makes a difference. If senior leadership has to go because they have been involved or have been derelict, then I do not think our population will stand for that. And if you think that that improves the system, push for it. But let us deal with the issue on the ground. I have presented the facts as much as I can. We have had independent reviews, people outside the SAF and MINDEF all looking into the problem. And if they decide that a change of the most senior leadership makes a difference, well it is up to them to recommend. But, for MINDEF and the SAF, we want to deal with day-to-day issues, aligning our incentives and disincentives so we get the whole system moving and making sure that the effect is felt on the ground, rather than posturing or politicking.
: I thank the Minister. As a serving NSman, I think incidents like this move us very strongly because we know it could be us or any other people serving with us. In relation to this, I have two questions: in any organisation like the army, we know the work we do is inherently risky and if any human error is made, incidents can happen. Are there any other models of other armies, for example, where they have been able to achieve zero training deaths? I think Minister mentioned as Minister for Manpower, he looked at other countries – are there any armies we can learn from? That is the first question.
And the second, if this incident is the result of, say, human error rather than systemic lapses, is there a need to halt training across the whole system? My concern, of course, is the message we may send to other parties who would be looking at us to see whether the Singapore army is able to deal with adversity? I think most serving NSmen I have spoken to remain ready to serve and ready to go forward.
: I thank Mr Vikram Nair for his reassuring comments. Can we learn from other militaries? We have looked at figures to see what injury and fatality rates for other militaries are. And, of course, we want to benchmark and make sure that we are somewhere there. But that is difficult because you cannot compare like and like. Systems with conscript systems, Taiwan and South Korea, their data is shared in different ways so that is not comparable. There is a military that we can sort of compare training and that is the UK but that is not conscript, that is regular service. And over a 10-year period, our safety records are just slightly better than theirs but that is not a reflection. They may have different terrain and so on and so forth.
I think we have to ask ourselves, where is our system at? Is this a systemic flaw? And when we ask these questions, remember as you said, so many of us here have or are serving National Service. We know what it is about and some of you even blog your experiences when you go to NS. It is not divorced from reality where there is one group doing National Service and another group just commenting on it. The very people who comment are the ones who do it every year when you go in and you know what the reality is. If you think that the system has degraded to a point, point out where it is and we will fix it.
But, if we are experiencing injuries and deaths as a result, as the Member said, human error, then neither should we punish indiscriminately, even those who are not involved nor degrade what has taken years for us to achieve. That does not bring anyone any comfort or positive results.
Deal with the issue, strengthen the system bit by bit and it will take years. You know how it is with some commercial companies. Before every board meeting, they repeat the same thing over and over again – the safety instructions, they tell you where the exits are. And I was told that even in some countries, the safety officer saw some chap walking up the stairs not using the stair rail and says, "This is a safety breach – you should use the stair rail because you can fall." You say it may be overboard, but there is a meaning to it, I think. And I think that can help. You need to have proper instructions and each time something happens, we must be open, we will review it, get independent parties to look at it, and then strengthen it.
Do we want a system where everyone is afraid? You walk into a room and everyone is frightened that if anything happens, his head will be chopped, more heads will be chopped, up, down. I have dealt with many organisations, both in my private life and in Government. I noticed that the best organisations run not ones which are on tenterhooks, fearful of reprisals so that they dare not do anything, and not ones that are slack. In fact, a slightly busy outfit is the best outfit. Too little, some things happen, too busy. You go into any organisation, you want people who are professional, who know what they do, who are conscious, who are not out just to punish unfairly, but to say how do I make this system better because it will take time, it will take effort, and it will take the part of everybody in their organisation to do so.
: I thank the Minister for his strong statement. Indeed we must strive to marry safety and creating a real operational environment. As a suggestion, would MINDEF consider re-employing retired officers and specialists who have operational and safety experience to train our NSFs and NSmen on what risks to look out for prior to on-the-ground missions? These retired or near to retirement SAF officers and Specialists have a wealth of experience to share; this could be a body separate from the IGO.
: Mr Speaker, not only will we take up the suggestion, we are already doing it. That is exactly one of the resources that we looked upon. But even that is in short supply – retired, experienced WOs, officers. And you remember the committee to strengthen National Service that we started up a couple of years ago where we wanted to put more trainers instead of national servicemen, we wanted to put those with the experience and that is exactly what we did. We extended the terms of service for the retired Warrant Officers because they serve as a valuable resource. So, because of this, we have redeployed, put safety as a priority, but we will also look for other avenues where we can put more experience on the ground to help our national servicemen as well as young officers build up the training and safety capabilities.
: Mr Speaker, just two questions for the Minister. My first pertains to the non-operational responsibilities on NSmen and NSFs such as NDP and Army Half Marathon. Some would be of the view that some aspects of organising such events could be undertaken by the private sector. To that extent, is MINDEF, as part of this safety review, looking into the time NSFs and NSmen have, to focus on training, maintenance and other operational responsibilities? So, that is the first question.
The second one pertains to the handout that Minister gave. This was the External Review Panel's report on the Committee of Inquiry's preliminary findings on the death of CFC Liu Kai. Paragraph 6(b) states that the SAF's medical response is based on the concept of rapid evacuation to the next echelon of care, however, such a response may not be adequate when a casualty cannot be evacuated promptly as in CFC Liu Kai's case. Can the Minister share why CFC Liu Kai was not evacuated promptly even though it does state earlier in the report that even if he could have been evacuated, he probably still would have demised from his injuries.
: I agree with the Member that we want to be careful as we are moving in this safety journey to allow time for units to focus on safety and if they are administrative aspects that deter them from it, then we should be prepared to relook. But this is a Command decision. CDF, the Commanders, the COs of the units must themselves come to and decide which is the tempo and you are quite right. For certain activities, they have relooked it, I will leave it to them to announce what they are not going to do so that it gives them enough bandwidth to focus on safety. That is a clear response to that.
For CFC Liu Kai's extrication, Members will understand why I have not gone into details but it was difficult to extricate.
: I would like to ask Minister, just now Minister mentioned that anybody can stop training if they find that it is not safe. I would like to ask, how to stop training, is there a hotline, or is there a whistle-blower hotline? How to assure them that they will not be dealt with unfairly later on if they were to report or being "tekan"?
In fact, recently, quite a number of mothers and grandmothers came to talk to me because their son or their grandson are going into NS, so they worry about this culture. So, can Minister address that please?
: I think the reassurance is what the Members have asked in this House and what I have said, I stated very clearly there is a TSR that anyone can stop. On the ground, usually in activities, you have a safety officer and a conducting officer. But even the CO of the activity who is supervising and the other conducting officers, if you bring it up to them, we want to have a culture where the person can assess the safety and risks. So, on the ground, there are avenues, that is in real time. But apart from that, if there is a recurrent safety lapse or risky behaviour, we have safety hotlines which you can call anonymously or you can write and we will take action. I think the message is very clear to the units after this Statement. It has always been, but if it needs to be clearer because of the reiteration, then remember that unsafe practices will not be tolerated.
: I met a family of a deceased soldier about two years ago and his mother told me it is hard for the pain to go away. In fact, she told me, it will never go away. As a mother, I felt for her and I can understand fully her pain. I know Minister highlighted earlier about the support through grief counsellors given to the platoon mates and to the families of the deceased soldiers. However, I would like to know if such emotional and psychological support is sufficient and if, indeed, more can be done to provide such support to the families?
: All of us can imagine how difficult it is for any parent and mothers to have to lose their sons. And all we can do is to pray that there will be some comfort. I have already shared how we provide relief by grief counsellors but even our efforts need to be very sensitive. Not all families can accept it at the time but we should always just be there to offer the help and be consistently there if it is needed. This is an area which you want to retain people in and yet you hope that you do not need their services. We are striking that balance and I have asked them to train a cadre of grief counsellors that can have institutional memory and that can help others in this similar type of vocation be able to assist those who have been bereaved.
: I have two questions. The first one is when can we expect the findings of the COI on CFC (NS) Pang's case, if there is an indication to when the findings will be released?
The second is, we all know there cannot be total safety without psychosocial safety
. Could the Minister share a little bit of the elements within this safety culture we are building that relates to the psychosocial safety climate, please?
: The COI is independent, so they take as much time as they need and I have no control over how fast or how quickly they want to conclude it. If they find that they need more information or facts, we will give them the fullness of time that they require. But normally, as was the case with CFC Liu Kai, it takes a number of months, from anything from two to four months.
The psychosocial aspect is incredibly important and we are not dealing with something which is esoteric. Safety cultures occur in many industries. The need for safety, whether it is construction, heavy machinery, and the same challenges we face in the workplace also apply to both military and civilian settings. So, it is a science and there are experts at it; and there are benchmarks. As I have said, this is intangible of safety culture. And in these conversations like I had, like many of you had over this Chinese New Year period when we talked about why this is happening, and there is always somewhat a tendency to say, "Well, one generation is different from the other."
In the Merdeka Generation, in the Pioneer Generation, it is more of aware of risks, because when we grew up, when we crossed roads, it was always a run or very hazardous. But a newer generation lives in a more structured environment. I do not know what the truth is. We will just have to deal with it and keep strengthening and keep tightening where we feel that it has to be and continue to move it. And if more people buy into this safety culture, I think it will help. But it cannot be dependent on that. It is very clear this is a Command responsibility. Commanders will be taken to task if they ignore safety instructions or have a poor safety culture.
: Prof Fatimah Lateef.
: Mr Speaker, I listened to the Minister's explanation with great interest. Also, being a Director of Quality, Clinical Service and Patient Safety in Emergency Medicine and Trauma, so that really has got a synergy between the two. The fact that the Minister mentioned that the incorporation of safety culture practices into the whole organisation is welcomed.
But more than that, I think, looking at the examples given by the Minister and the whole description, it is actually about human factors – human factors and human errors. So there are people who study human factors, human factor science, human factor analysis and perhaps, this is one area of focus, not just after an incident happens but also perhaps as a preventive measure to get human factor specialists to actually study some of the more high-risk activities. Probably, you will not be able to study all the activities that go on in the SAF just as we cannot do it in medicine but perhaps the more high risk activities that people are going to be involved in, and especially, compared to medicine, you are involved with more heavy machinery and equipment. So, how do we use human factor specialists to help us with this?
: The Member has raised a very important, relevant point and it is incorporated. Some of you would remember that the RSAF in the 1990s, had a spate of very difficult incidents. It was gut-wrenching – pilots. And today, the RSAF is a far cry from that. And that is exactly what they have incorporated, where they report near misses for equipment and near misses arising from human error. They separate it because the solutions are different. All our services do it, to some extent, but Army is a much larger machinery. Many tens of thousands people running around. But we have got to get that into our system at every level. And it will be up to commanders and they are going to give it their all because they know this is their moral responsibility; this is their professional accountability and this is something that we must get right.
: Mr Liang Eng Hwa.
: Sir, the Minister mentioned about the Inspector-General Office (IGO). I would like to ask the Minister how more effective can the IGO be than the current set-up. I believe you have the SSRD. What difference, how much more different and how much effective can it be?
Secondly, the Minister mentioned about servicemen being able to report near misses or incidents. I know some servicemen, for some reasons, may not want to report some of these incidents because of unit cohesion and other matters as well. Can I ask the Minister: is there a way, whether MINDEF or SAF would, maybe go directly to the servicemen to do surveys to get an overall sense of training risks and then from there, perhaps to get to be more aware of incidents that could happen on the ground?
: Mr Speaker, the Member has asked about these so-called "silent" surveys, and we have them in the civilian settings – the Mystery Shopper, for example. And yes, there is much on the cards where you do safety audits and you check; you have now hotlines that people can call in. So, that will be part of the menu of things that we will have to ramp up. It already exists but we want to make sure that it is more accessible and the message gets through.
How effective is the Inspector-General? Well, when the Inspector-General, who is the Chief of Staff-Joint Staff (COS-JS) calls you, you listen, and you better listen.
: Assoc Prof Walter Theseira.
: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I refer to the instruction given by the trainer to CFC Liu to move the Land Rover forward and overtake the Bionix. What is known about the reasons why this instruction was given? And second, was the trainer and CFC Liu briefed on the expected manoveurs during the exercise, including the possibility of an extrication drill happening?
: Mr Speaker, I presented what the COI found. And for the first question why he asked him to move forward, it was not clear to the COI and we have to leave it to the Police. That has got legal implications. Second, was CFC Liu familiar with these aspects? He was attached to an Armour Unit. As I have said, extrication drills are part and parcel of the exercise.
: Order. End of Ministerial Statement.
: Mr Speaker, I beg to move, "That, notwithstanding the Standing Orders, the Motion on Ageing with Purpose and the Motion on Support for Care-givers, appearing on today's Order Paper, be taken jointly and the debate on these motions be proceeded with simultaneously as though the debate were on a single Motion".
Mr Speaker, as the subject matter on these two Motions listed as items 6 and 7 on today's Order Paper are inter-related and the issues are interdependent, this business Motion will allow Members to speak on both Motions at the same time and address all concerns in a single speech. Members can put forth their views over the full range of issues and debate in a more holistic manner. It will also allow the Ministers to give comprehensive replies in a single speech, taking into account the closely connected issues. At the end of the debate, Members will be able to vote on the two Motions separately. Mr Speaker, Sir, I beg to move.
: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Minister for Law, I beg to move, "That the Bill be now read a Second time."
Singapore takes a firm stance against money laundering and terrorism financing, or ML/TF. In 1992, we joined the Financial Action Task Force, which is an inter-governmental body that sets international standards and promotes the effective implementation of measures, to combat ML/TF and the financing of proliferation activities relating to weapons of mass destruction.
We have implemented a strong anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism, or AML/CFT framework, in line with the international standards set by the Task Force. This includes the prevention, supervision, enforcement, confiscation of proceeds of crime, and targeted financial sanctions against terrorism and proliferation financing.
The financial sector and non-financial sectors, such as casinos and pawnbrokers are subject to a comprehensive range of AML/CFT measures. The financial sector in particular, has been subject to robust supervision for many years.
ML/TF enables criminal activity to go undetected and poses serious national security concerns. It also damages our reputation as a trusted international financial and trading centre. A robust AML/CFT framework would therefore benefit Singapore and Singaporeans.
In line with the broader AML/CFT framework, we have introduced various measures to mitigate ML/TF risks in the precious stones and precious metals dealers, or the PSMD sector.
In 2014, the cash transaction reporting regime under the Corruption, Drug Trafficking and Other Serious Crimes Act, or CDSA, was introduced. This requires PSMD to perform customer due diligence, keep records and file cash transaction reports for cash transactions exceeding S$20,000.
In 2015, more comprehensive AML/CFT measures were introduced for pawnbrokers, a subset of the sector.
Given the inherent risks in the PSMD sector, however, there is a need to take additional and further steps. This would also bring our regime fully in line with international standards set by the Financial Action Task Force.
The Bill will strengthen existing measures by establishing a comprehensive supervisory and regulatory regime that is risk-focused and which addresses the specific ML/TF risks in the PSMD sector.
It will allow us to prevent dealing in precious stones and precious metals from being used to facilitate ML/TF, by firstly, regulating persons who carry on a business of regulated dealing or business as an intermediary for regulated dealing; and secondly, providing for additional measures beyond the current cash transaction reporting regime for the PSMD sector.
We have developed the Bill in consultation with key stakeholders through firstly, a survey of the industry; secondly, consultations with industry associations such as the Singapore Jewellers Association, the Diamond Exchange of Singapore, as well as the Singapore Bullion Market Association; and finally, through a public consultation held between 13 September and 12 October 2018.
In response to the feedback received, we have streamlined the requirements in the Bill to manage regulatory and compliance costs. We have also benchmarked the requirements against practices in other jurisdictions, such as the United Kingdom and also Belgium.
Let me just run the key features of the Bill through this house.
The Bill provides firstly for the appointment of a Registrar to supervise the PSMD sector. Secondly, it imposes comprehensive AML/CFT measures on regulated dealers. Thirdly, it provides for investigation and enforcement powers, as well as prescription of penalties for failure to abide by the requirements. The Bill provides for the regulation of any person who carries on a business of regulated dealing or a business as an intermediary for regulated dealing. This includes persons involved in the manufacturing, importing or possessing for sale, and selling or offering for sale any precious stone, precious metal or precious product. These persons are currently subject to the cash transaction reporting regime. The Bill will impose additional measures on these classes of dealers.
The Bill goes further to include:
(a) The sale or redemption of asset-backed tokens, which are instruments backed by precious stones, metals or products. Such tokens may be used for ML/TF as they are good stores of value;
(b) The purchase of precious stones, precious metals or precious products from a customer for the purpose of resale, as these items may be proceeds from crime, or used as means for ML/TF.
Intermediaries such as auction houses and providers of trading platforms services for PSMD, whether by electronic means or otherwise, are also covered under the regime, as they facilitate transactions between buyers and sellers. Regulating these intermediaries will prevent such transactions from being used for ML/TF purposes.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the Minister to appoint a Registrar, Deputy Registrars and Assistant Registrars, to supervise the PSMD sector. Regulated dealers, unless exempted, must register with the Registrar, in order to carry out the regulated dealing. Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Registrar may refuse to grant or refuse to renew registration, under certain circumstances. For example, if applicants were convicted of offences such as those involving fraud, dishonesty or money laundering. This will help ensure that individuals who are not fit and proper do not operate as regulated dealers in Singapore. Clause 9 of the Bill provides for the Registrar to impose conditions of registration on registered dealers. Conditions which may be imposed include the requirement to inform the Registrar of changes to registration details, to ensure that registered dealers remain fit and proper. The Registrar may cancel or suspend the registration of dealers under certain circumstances, for example, if the registered dealer fails to comply with any condition of registration, or if the registered dealer is no longer a fit and proper person.
Part 3 of the Bill sets out the measures for prevention of money laundering and financing of terrorism which will apply to all regulated dealers who carry out any part of their business of regulated dealing or business as an intermediary for regulated dealing in Singapore. The requirements are broadly categorised as transaction-based or entity-based. Let me explain that.
The transaction-based requirements are largely similar to existing requirements under the cash transaction reporting regime. These include clause 16 which requires regulated dealers to perform customer due diligence (CDD) measures under prescribed circumstances, in addition to the existing requirement to do so for cash transactions above $20,000. Clause 17 which requires regulated dealers to submit a copy of the cash transaction report to the Registrar, in addition to existing requirements to file cash transaction reports. Clause 18 which requires regulated dealers to keep records of transactions where CDD measures are performed and information obtained through these CDD measures. Clause 21 which requires regulated dealers to submit a copy of the information of suspicious transactions to the Registrar, in addition to the existing requirement already under the CDSA to disclose suspicious transactions and also under the Terrorism (Suppression of Financing) Act to report terrorism financing information.
The Bill sets out entity-based requirements, and these are new and provided for under clause 19, which requires regulated dealers to implement adequate programmes and measures to prevent ML/TF, such as the introduction of internal policies, procedures, and controls. In line with the risk-based approach to prevent ML/TF, businesses will only be required to develop procedures to address the risks identified in their risk assessment, in addition to the principal obligations prescribed.
Taking in feedback from the public consultation, we have streamlined the principal obligations provided in the Bill. We will also provide guidance on the obligations and procedures to address the varying degrees and levels of risks, to help regulated dealers mitigate risks of ML/TF, whilst at the same time also managing compliance costs. The Registrar may give written directions to regulated dealers under certain circumstances, such as to stop a particular employee who has been negligent in performing AML/CFT measures on multiple occasions from conducting any part of the regulated dealer’s business. This is necessary to enable the Registrar to immediately address any activity which contravenes requirements in the Bill or which may pose an ML/TF risk.
The Bill provides the Registrar with powers of inspection and monitoring; investigation; and seizure of property, to deal with possible contraventions of the Bill. Upon conviction, non-compliance with the Bill may lead to fines not exceeding $100,000 and imprisonment terms of up to three years, depending on the nature and severity of the particular contravention. This is also in line with penalties introduced in other Acts, such as the Pawnbrokers Act, as the culpability of persons who commit ML/TF offences would be similar.
Clause 38 of the Bill provides for the Minister to exempt any person or class of persons, or any activity, from any provision of the Bill, subject to conditions or restrictions specified. This allows regulated dealers who are already covered under other AML/CFT regimes to be exempted. For example, it is intended for all MAS-regulated financial institutions to be exempted from registration and AML/CFT requirements under the Bill, where they are already subjected to MAS regulations. Classes of financial institutions that conduct regulated dealing, for example banks, insurers, stored value facilities, will continue to be supervised by MAS.
Finally, the Bill provides for a transition period of up to six months upon the commencement of the Bill to provide sufficient time for regulated dealers to register with the Registrar. The Registrar will also work with the industry, including conducting outreach to raise AML/CFT awareness as well as issuing guidance to regulated dealers, to ensure that they are well-placed to comply with the new requirements proposed in this Bill.
In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the Bill will allow us to establish an AML/CFT regime which will raise our AML/CFT standards in the PSMD sector and strengthen Singapore's AML/CFT framework. This will help us to better manage ML/TF risks, and combat crime and improve security both domestically and globally. It will also reaffirm our commitment to be a responsible member of the international community, upholding our status as a well-regarded and well-regulated financial centre. With that, Mr Speaker, I beg to move.
: Sir, in the international web of money laundering and terrorism financing, it is important that Singapore does its part to create an environment in which crime does not pay. As the way these syndicates and perpetrators work is dynamic, it is important not to leave a gap in our preventive framework which they can exploit. Therefore, this Bill is timely to bolster our anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing measures by increasing the standard of such practices in the industry, and, also, to protect the many hardworking merchants who operate within the industry.
Precious stones and precious minerals are highly valued yet relatively compact, making it easy and desirable to store or smuggle. Their worldwide demand makes it easy to convert their value into money and vice versa. Their form is versatile and easily changed, making it difficult to trace. For instance, in "Operation Meltdown" overseen by the United States Homeland Security Investigations, proceeds from drug trafficking were money laundered through gold. Part of the scheme involved converting gold bullion into nuts, bolts and other items, enabling them to declare them as “gold pigment". These characteristics make precious stones and precious minerals especially susceptible to be used for money laundering and terrorism financing. Therefore, in order to increase anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing measures in this industry, this Bill seeks to regulate precious stones and precious minerals dealers. I have a few questions on the scope of the Bill.
Firstly, the definition of regulated dealers says "a business of regulated dealing; or business as an intermediary for regulated dealing." What does "business" refer to? From paragraph (e) of the definition of "regulated dealing" under clause 2, this Bill seeks to regulate the purchasing of precious stones, precious mineral or precious product for the purpose of resale. Would it include individuals who buy precious stones and precious minerals who make a one-off sale, for instance, to the pawnshop? What if there is more than one purpose for purchase? For instance, gold pieces are often bought during wedding preparation both as a gift but also as an investment. Would that be considered purchase for the purpose of resale? Also, what kinds of situations is paragraph (b) involving "intermediary" envisaged to cover?
Secondly, how will the question of whether a product is a precious product according to the definition be worked out? If the value is referring to retail value, how will it be determined whether 50% of the value is attributable to precious stone or precious material or to the branding of a product or the craftsmanship that goes into it? As luxury brands may carry a range of products – some with precious stones and precious metals which may fall under regulated dealing. It is necessary that there be sufficient clarity and guidance on what is or is not a precious product. Clarity is important for compliance and effective regulation, yet it is also vital that these new regulations do not unduly curb in businesses' creativity when designing products.
Thirdly, clause 6 says that "a person must not act or hold out to act as a regulated dealer unless the person is a registered dealer." Would this Bill apply to persons or businesses who are based overseas but who engage in regulated dealing with individuals or dealers in Singapore? For instance, if a manufacturer based overseas buys scrap metal from Singapore, would that overseas manufacturer require registration?
This Bill adopts a risk-based approach to regulation. This is good because of money laundering and terrorist financing, both dynamic, always looking for new loopholes to exploit. The common, fundamental principle running through the whole variety of players in the precious stones and precious minerals industry is that of identifying and addressing risks appropriately.
How that works for each business may differ. For instance, the kinds of risk that a person in the scrap metal business faces and a jeweller faces are different. As such, it is important that the objective is clear and expectations communicated so that each of the different sectors can comply meaningfully. There needs to be input from each sector of the industry so that the guidelines will make sense for the kinds of situations they may face. This Bill will help ease the transition of working current informal checking processes into regulatory framework that is sensible and robust.
Further, there needs to be training and education so that regulated dealers and their employees will be able to effectively implement the appropriate guidelines. If the regulated dealers understand the process but are unable to articulate it to the employees, the regulatory framework will not be as effectively implemented. As risk profiles may change due to the dynamic nature of money laundering and terrorism financing, there needs to be a two-way feedback on what works, what does not, how things need to be changed. That is why it is good that the Bill allows for adjustment of guidelines, standards and codes of practice under clause 35.
These guidelines need to be flexible enough to allow discretion to be applied to individual situations, yet they need to provide sufficient guidance for them to be effective. The idea is not to be too burdensome for legitimate transactions but, at the same time, be sufficiently robust to identify and deter illegitimate transactions.
As the effects of this Bill will be felt at all levels of the precious metal and precious stones market, including the individual buyers, anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorism financing need to be an ongoing conversation requiring regulator-industry cooperation. For instance, there are concerns that customers will not understand why identity or proof of ownership may be important. Some customers may feel uncomfortable, threatened or put off by needing to answer so many questions. Lack of understanding of certain terms used in risk-profiling, such as "politically exposed persons" (PEP), may also be a hindrance to obtaining the requisite information. These concerns of regulated dealers overstepping and intruding into customers' details unnecessarily cannot be treated lightly. Indeed, this is part of the feedback that has come from the industry, that is, whether or not the questions to be asked of potential customers are overly intrusive.
To this end, what will be done to raise awareness among the general public about what to expect and the importance of such processes? How will regulated dealers be supported in complying with the guidelines, for instance, giving them the power to ask for certain private information or building capacity so that they will be able to search in the relevant "watchlists" should such actions become necessary? Further, what will be done to address concerns that private information will not be obtained unnecessarily and that private information obtained will remain secure and confidential if eventually not needed for any anti-money-laundering or counter-terrorism financing investigations?
Regarding the information gathered, clause 29 of the Bill provides for disclosure of information or documents to a foreign authority. This is good because international cooperation in this area is vital to effectively identify which transactions are riskier.
Sir, this Bill is timely. It seeks to limit the use of precious metals and precious stones in terrorism financing and money-laundering. Therefore, I support the Bill.
: Mr Speaker, Sir, I would like to first declare my interest as a lawyer who issues compliance advice on anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism matters from time to time.
Singapore's position as a major financial hub brings with it greater exposure to transnational economic crime. To counteract this, Singapore has developed and implemented a robust anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism framework to target, prevent and confiscate the proceeds of crime, particularly within the financial sector and the Senior Minister of State has mentioned some aspects of it in his earlier speech.
This House had, as recently as in October last year, passed the Serious Crimes and Counter-Terrorism Bill, to strengthen our ability to detect and deter criminals. Apart from the financial sector, other designated non-financial sectors, such as pawnbrokers, are also subject to AML/CFT measures.
However, we are only as safe and strong as our weakest link. The Financial Action Task Force, in its evaluation of Singapore's AML framework in 2016, has identified the precious stones and precious metal dealers (PSMD) sector as a risk area for controls to be improved. The PSMD sector in Singapore is not currently subject to any specific AML/CFT controls. This is a gap that criminals may exploit and may even be presently exploiting. The PSMD sector is particularly vulnerable, as identified by Mr Christopher de Souza, because of the fact that precious stones and metals are easily transported, concealed and converted into cash. This can be used by criminals to launder monies to hide their illicit sources of funds.
The case of an errant lawyer in 2006 is a good example. He had used approximately $2 million that he held on trust for his client to purchase various pieces of jewellery and precious stones from a jeweller and absconded with all these items. The payments were first made by way of a telegraphic transfer from his firm’s client account and, subsequently, a cash cheque was issued in the name of the firm’s client account. His clients subsequently tried to recover their losses from the jeweller via a civil action before the Singapore courts. In doing so, the clients alleged that the jeweller ought to have known from the circumstances of the transactions that he was using monies belonging to another in breach of trust.
The Singapore Court of Appeal, in its 2010 decision, considered that whilst there were some circumstances surrounding the transaction which arguably might have raised cause for concern about the probity of the transaction, the jeweller did not cross the boundaries of reasonable commercial conduct in relation to the first transaction paid through telegraphic transfer of monies. In arriving at its decision, a key consideration of the Court of Appeal was that there was no pre-existing practice of jewellers questioning customers on the source of funds, such that it would not be fair to criticise the jeweller’s staff for their failure to query the source of purchaser’s funds.
The Court of Appeal's comments in this regard were particularly pertinent and exemplifies the gap in our present regulatory scheme. It said:
"Clearly, it is not the usual practice for jewellers and retailers in general, to ask their clients searching questions about the source of their funds. As rightly pointed out by the Judge, indeed, there are usually cogent reasons for not asking questions. Genuine clients would feel offended, the transaction might be unreasonably delayed, and costs incurred. Admittedly, in certain types of commercial transactions, there might well be a practice of exercising due diligence…In Singapore, unlike the United States and the United Kingdom, there are currently no rules that require jewellers, gem dealers and precious metal dealers to implement anti-money laundering programmes… ...This is why the Judge quite correctly remarked that most honest retailers would not bother to check on the background or standing of their customers even for very large purchases; there is simply no general practice of making inquiries and imposing such an invariable requirement on large transactions might jeopardise completion of large numbers of legitimate transactions."
If the jeweller in question had been required to conduct due diligence checks on the source of funds, perhaps this unfortunate matter might have been prevented.
I welcome the Act, which will shore up our defences against financial crime. I also applaud the fact that MINLAW had conducted public consultation, incorporated the feedback into the Bill that is being introduced in the House today for Second Reading.
I take the opportunity to make a few short comments on the proposed Act.
The first area concerns how the Ministry intends to ensure that jewellers, bullion traders, jewellery wholesalers and retailers, auctioneers and secondhand goods dealers – who would be regulated dealers under the Act – would be adequately equipped to understand their obligations under the Act, such as their obligations to conduct customer due diligence (CDD) and filing of suspicious transaction reports (STRs).
Such dealers may be tradesmen who may not be familiar with or have experience in carrying out such AML controls, or whose current business models would need to be adapted to allow such controls to be implemented. What are some of steps that the Ministry has taken or plans to take to ensure that regulated dealers will have the necessary training and will be well versed with their obligations under the Act and understand the consequences of non-compliance? For example, ongoing industry engagement through industry bodies such as the Singapore Jewellers Association?
Next, it should also be noted that PSMDs are generally not as well resourced as banks. Would the Ministry be providing support to enable PSMDs to build capacity to conduct CDD? In comparison, I recall it was announced that the MAS was working with the banking sector to develop a common screening platform for CDD purposes. This has a salutary effect of ensuring common standards as well as ensuring that compliance costs are kept in check.
I wonder how the Ministry would deal with possible situations arising where purchasers could spread their purchases with PSMDs to escape detection by transacting below the threshold amount of $20,000 so as to escape CDD requirements. What expectations will be placed on PSMDs to find out whether such multiple purchases were or will be made? It may not be practical to require PSMDs to share information of purchasers’ identities with their competitors. But on the other hand, there could be scope for pooling information amongst affiliated PSMDs or outlets of the same PSMDs. I welcome the Senior Minister of State's clarification on this.
Finally, section 18 of the Act requires a regulated dealer to keep prescribed documents and information for a prescribed period of time. The Bill does not specify what this period of time is, save to say that the different periods may be prescribed for different classes of regulated dealers, different types of designated transactions or different documents and information. Presumably these requirements will be specified through secondary legislation.
Could the Senior Minister of State please provide some guidance as to what the prescribed period of time would likely be? Would this be, for example, five years, as in the case for pawnbrokers? What are the considerations behind the need to segregate the prescribed period based on different classes of dealers or transactions? Notwithstanding my queries, I support the Bill.
: Senior Minister of State Edwin Tong.
: I thank the two hon Members for their overall support for the Bill. I would like to just jump straight into addressing the queries which have been raised, all of which have been very valid questions.
Mr de Souza asked what the definition of "business" is in the Bill. We would draw from the Business Names Registration Act (2014) and I would just like to define it as such: "'Business' would include every form of trade, commerce and profession and any other activity that is carried on for the purposes of gain but does not include any office, employment or occupation". So, it refers, for example, to companies, partnerships and sole proprietorships which sell precious metals, stones and products, such as jewellery.
Mr de Souza also asked whether the definition of "regulated dealing" covers purchases of precious stones, metals and products for multiple purposes, including for the purpose of resale. It is not the intention of the regime to cover individuals who make one-off purchases and subsequently may decide then at some stage to sell their items to a second-hand goods dealer. Whilst such activities may be carried on for the purposes of gain, these are conceivably not matters that fall within the definition of "business". But, of course, if this happens once too often and there is a pattern of such activity, then all of that would be taken into account when looked at and considered in the context of the definition as to whether there is activity that generates gain under the definition. So, from the individual's perspective, I have addressed Mr de Souza's point, but from the perspective of the regulated dealers, as well as those who purchase the second-hand items from these individuals, they would have to perform the AML/CFT measures where appropriate.
On intermediaries, Mr de Souza asked what situations specific to limb B of the definition of regulated dealings involving intermediaries do we envisage we would cover. Intermediaries, as defined in clause 2 of the Bill, such as precious stones and metals exchange or auctioneer, would be covered under the Bill and we need to cover the intermediaries because, otherwise, the intermediaries would immediately provide a way in which you would enable anonymity in the transactions, if one uses the intermediary to deal with the transactions in these precious stones or metals. Such intermediaries may import the items from overseas suppliers and perform the sale in Singapore on behalf of their overseas suppliers. Depending on the mode of transaction through the intermediary, it may not be possible for suppliers to perform the AML/CFT measures required, for example, to verify the identity of the customer. It is, therefore, necessary to also regulate intermediaries to ensure that the appropriate AML/CFT measures are performed where necessary.
Mr de Souza asked if the Bill applies to persons or businesses based overseas but engaged in dealing with regulated dealers in Singapore. As stated in clause 14 of the Bill, the requirements of Part III, which deals with this aspect of Mr de Souza's concern, apply to all regulated dealers who carry on any part of their business of regulated dealing in Singapore. So, the touchstone is that, if the business is carried on in Singapore, it will apply to them. In the example that Mr de Souza cited, the manufacturers based overseas would not have to register with the Ministry or comply with the requirements of the regime when purchasing scrap metal from Singapore as long as he does not carry out any part of his business of regulated dealing in Singapore. Nevertheless, such dealers will be subject, of course, to the relevant AML/CFT verifications and processes in their home jurisdictions.
Mr de Souza asked how the Ministry will determine if a product is a precious product. There is a lot of subjectivity to that. But as Mr de Souza also mentioned there needs to be a degree of flexibility in the way we look at this. Obviously, if one is too prescriptive with the definition, then the effects of the Bill will lose its flexibility and that may then, allow a loophole to be introduced. Having said that, we recognise that precious products may have different parameters to determine their value beyond just the value of the stones and metals, for example, in the branding or craftsmanship of such products.
In cases where the classification of precious products is not immediately apparent, we will, of course, work with the industry to determine if they ought to be considered as precious products, and then provide the necessary guidance to the rest of the industry. And on that score, I recognise both Mr Murali Pillai and Mr de Souza raising the point that we need to have more communication between the regulator and the regulated and that obviously would be done as we embark on this journey after the Bill is passed.
On multiple transactions, Mr Murali Pillai asked how the ministry would handle customers who spread the transactions overtime, flying under the radar and keeping the transactions below the $20,000 threshold. As Mr Murali Pillai knows, under clause 15, the regulated dealers are required to perform CDD measures on a customer if there are two or more transactions in a single day, which exceed the threshold of $20,000.
This is an existing requirement under the Corruption, Drug Trafficking and Other Serious Crimes (Confiscation of Benefits) Act. It is possible for customers to transact with multiple, not just one, but multiple different regulated dealers and go below the threshold each time, to avoid the CDD checks. However, the threshold itself is designed to make it difficult for criminals to misuse regulated dealers for illicit purposes, by introducing a degree of friction in the system; in a way in which the transactions would be done. Should dealers come across any suspicious transactions, they also have to report it to the Suspicious Transactions Reporting Office (STRO) in accordance with already prevailing existing requirements.
We will not expect regulated dealers to share their customers' information with their competitors, obviously. As the Member Mr Murali Pillai pointed out, that may not be practical, but he has raised an interesting suggestion about how some of the information could be pulled within or amongst the affiliated dealers or outlets of the same PSMD and that might be a better way to try to link the different transactions should such an occurrence of multiple transactions occur.
On the record-keeping requirement, Mr Murali Pillai asked about the prescribed period. Mr Murali Pillai is right, we do intend to prescribe in the subsidiary legislation for dealers to keep records for a period of five years. This is similar to the record-keeping requirement imposed by all other sectors, including Pawnbrokers, and is also aligned with the international standards set by the Financial Action Task Force.
Mr Murali Pillai asked for the rationale behind the power to prescribe different time periods for different classes of dealers or transactions. This is needed because the level of ML/TF risk posed by different classes of dealers or transactions may itself require different time periods for the records to be kept.
At this point in time, we do not intend to prescribe different time periods, but would like to have the power to do so, and make the adjustments at a later stage if we assess that there is a need to impose more stringent record-keeping requirements on certain prescribed classes of dealers or transactions.
I just want to touch on how we intend to support the industry, because that is obviously a very relevant question that both Members have raised. To start off, as I have mentioned earlier, we had engaged stakeholders early on, even before we formulated this Bill, to better understand the mechanics of the sector, how it works, what would be issues that they face on the ground and what is needed to build the capacity to comply with the relevant requirements. These stakeholders, as I mentioned earlier, would include the Singapore Jewellers Association, and the Singapore Bullion Market Association and so on.
During the public consultation, we also held briefings and dialogues for industry associations to explain and clarify the requirements of the regime. Moving forward, we will continue to work with these industry associations to engage regulated dealers to help them comply – first of all, understand, and thereafter also comply, with the requirements of the regime.
And we intend to do it through regular AML/CFT seminars, outreach sessions, and dialogues for the dealers, and the first session will likely be held when registration commences. Secondly, the production and circulation of AML/CFT guidance materials. These will include details on how to perform proper customer due diligence, how to perform risk assessments, and implement internal policies, procedures and controls. And based on feedback from associations, we will also, where appropriate, provide the materials in different languages and issue templates and checklists, so as to help the ground and the smaller players within this sector to better appreciate and also implement these measures. For instance, we will issue a brochure which will contain information on the registration process to regulated dealers before registration commences.
We agree with Mr de Souza that the ML/TF risks faced by the sub-sectors within the industry may differ. There is not necessarily parity within the different sub-sectors and we will work with these sub-sectors and industry associations to support them and also develop guidelines which may be specific to their needs.
Mr de Souza asked if regulated dealers will be given the power to ask for private information. In general, regulated dealers are not prohibited from collecting, using, or disclosing personal data as long as it is strictly required for compliance with the requirements in this Bill.
However, that said, regulated dealers are required to ensure that reasonable security arrangements are in place to protect personal data in their possession or under their control. That is really no different from the current regime, anyway. Other than complying with the requirements in the Bill, regulated dealers also have to comply with the Personal Data Protection Act and ensure that personal information obtained is not used or disclosed for other purposes, such as marketing, without the consent of the customer. Where appropriate, we will also be issuing guidance on how personal information should be obtained, handled and stored.
Mr de Souza asked what will be done to raise awareness amongst the general public about the new requirements of the regime and the importance of such processes. Those are very good points and we will work with the industry to inform the public of the importance and requirements of the regime, in particular the need to obtain customer’s personal information as part of that due diligence exercise, so as to facilitate regulated dealers in their compliance with the regime. For example, we may also consider issuing posters and other guidance notes on the new requirements for regulated dealers to put up in their places of business.
Mr Speaker, Sir, money laundering and terrorism financing are serious offences. They pose significant social, security and reputational concerns. To address these concerns, Singapore has implemented a strong AML/CFT framework for the financial and non-financial sectors. In line with the broader AML/CFT framework, this Bill will strengthen AML/CFT standards in the PSMD sector through supervision and regulation. It will help to manage money laundering and terrorism financing risks within the sector, which, as Members have pointed out, is something that has been missing; this is one further piece amongst the various steps that we take. This would be crucial to combat crime and also improve security both domestically and globally.
Finally, it will also reaffirm our commitment to be a responsible member of the international community. Sir, with the support of the House, I beg to move.
: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Minister for Health, I beg to move, "That the Bill be now read a Second time."
Sir, tobacco use, including smoking, is a significant public health problem in Singapore. Among risk factors, tobacco use is the second highest contributor to ill-health and premature death in Singapore. More than 2,000 Singaporeans die prematurely from smoking-related diseases each year. The social cost of smoking in Singapore has been conservatively estimated to be at least S$600 million a year in direct healthcare costs as well as lost productivity.
Singapore's long-standing public health objective is to promote and move towards a tobacco-free society. To this end, over the years, Singapore has adopted a comprehensive, multi-pronged approach to tobacco control with the aim of, among others:
(a) Preventing or reducing the opportunities for non-smokers, particularly youths, to pick up smoking;
(b) Encouraging existing smokers to quit; and
(c) Encouraging Singaporeans to adopt a tobacco-free lifestyle.
Over the years, measures adopted as part of our multi-pronged approach have included banning smoking in certain public places, restricting tobacco advertising and promotion, introducing mandatory graphic health warnings (GHWs) on tobacco product packaging, banning the use of misleading descriptors such as "mild" and "light" on tobacco products and also imposing taxes.
As a result of these efforts, smoking rates in Singapore fell from 23% in 1977 to 19% in 1984, and further to 12.6% in 2004. However, in recent years, the decline in smoking rates has been harder to sustain. The smoking rates have been fluctuating between 12% and 14% in the last 10 years, with no clear pattern of continuous decline. More than 1 in five men smoke daily and our male smoking rate is higher than that in Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States. Clearly, we need to do more to stem tobacco use among Singaporeans, with a view to denormalising the use of tobacco products and bringing overall smoking rates to a level that is as low as possible.
To this end, over the last few years, we have been studying best practices in other countries, as well as the recommendations adopted under the auspices of the World Health Organization (WHO) with respect to the implementation of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC), which Singapore is a party to. We have consulted extensively on new tobacco control measures, which include banning displays of tobacco products at the retail point-of-sale, increasing the size of graphic health warnings, raising the minimum age for tobacco and a prohibition on flavoured tobacco products.
The ban on point-of-sale tobacco product displays took effect in August 2017, with the aim of reducing exposure of non-smokers, especially youths, to the advertising effect of such displays, and discouraging impulse purchases. Slightly over a year ago, this Parliament also passed legislative changes to increase the Minimum Legal Age for the purchase, use, possession, sale and supply of tobacco products. Excise duty on tobacco products was raised by 10% last year to further discourage Singaporeans' consumption of tobacco products. We are now continuing with our multi-pronged approach to tobacco control by introducing a measure that the FCTC Guidelines call on parties to consider adopting, and that is the standardised packaging of tobacco products.
The design of tobacco products and packaging is used to promote tobacco products among adults and the young alike. Key elements of tobacco packaging include brand imagery, logos, colours, and of course, the pack design. Cigarette packs serve as a "five-second commercial" whenever the pack is drawn from the shelf or one's pocket, held in the palm of a hand, or placed in full view on the table. Independent research and reviews of tobacco industry documents have found that packaging is an effective marketing medium that helps to build direct relationships between the tobacco company and the consumer through possession and use.
Packaging innovation, design and value packaging are used not only to distinguish products from competitors but also to promote the product, communicate brand values and target specific consumer groups. Evidence suggests that the appeal of branded packaging also acts as one of the factors encouraging children and young adults to experiment with tobacco and to establish and thereafter continue the habit of smoking.
Standardised packaging of tobacco products generally refers to: (a) the strict regulation of promotional aspects of tobacco packaging; and (b) standardisation of packaging elements. This includes removing all logos, colours, brand images and promotional information on packaging, other than brand names and product names (which includes the variants) displayed in a standard colour and font style. It is often accompanied by a third element, namely, the incorporation of prominent mandatory health warnings.
Singapore is not the first country to consider introducing standardised packaging of tobacco products.
Australia introduced standardised packaging in December 2012. According to a study commissioned by the Australian Government, between December 2012 and September 2015, standardised packaging was responsible for reducing the country's smoking prevalence by 0.55 percentage points. This amounted to about 25% of the 2.2 percentage point decline in smoking prevalence during that period.
In 2018, a study conducted by the French Department of Public Health found that one million daily smokers in the country quit the habit between 2016 and 2017. This decline, which was described by the French authorities as "historic", was attributed to a raft of tobacco control measures implemented in 2016, including standardised packaging.
Other countries have also moved towards standardised packaging. The United Kingdom, Ireland, New Zealand and Norway have fully implemented standardised packaging measures. Thailand, Hungary, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia and Uruguay are at varying stages of implementing standardised packaging, while Canada recently concluded a public consultation on the draft specifications on the proposed measure. Burkina Faso, Georgia, and Romania have passed enabling legislation for standardised packaging, but have yet to announce the date for full implementation. Other countries considering standardised packaging at the legislative or governmental level include Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Panama, South Africa, Sri Lanka and Mauritius.
The role that branded packaging plays in encouraging children and young adults to experiment with tobacco and to establish and continue a habit of smoking is one that is of particular concern in Singapore, where more than 90% of smokers initiate smoking before the age of 21.
A local study carried out by the Health Promotion Board (HPB) to assess Singaporeans' perceptions of current and plainer cigarette product packaging found that the current cigarette pack designs influence both smokers' and non-smokers' perceptions towards various attributes of the cigarette packs. Attractive pack designs were associated with high quality cigarettes and increased likelihood of attracting youth to try such products. Amongst a significant minority of non-smokers, the perceived pack attractiveness was associated with the intention to try smoking.
In contrast, plainer or standardised packs were generally seen as less attractive compared to current cigarette packs. HPB's findings from other local studies also indicated that packs with darker colours and at least 75% graphic warnings were considered by Singaporeans to be least attractive and perceived to be more harmful to health. Health warnings on packs with at least 75% graphic warnings and darker colours were also more noticeable compared to packs with just 50% graphic warnings.
Between 2010 and 2018, MOH engaged in a continuous process of reviewing and evaluating a substantial body of international research related to tobacco product marketing and standardised packaging. The Ministry has also received a range of feedback, comments and concerns with respect to the possible introduction of standardised packaging over the years. All of these have been carefully considered and addressed in detail in two papers published by my Ministry in support of and in response to the public consultations carried out in 2018.
Ultimately, Mr Speaker, our final assessment of the available international and local evidence is this – that the introduction of standardised packaging in Singapore, taken together with enlarged graphic health warnings, or the "SP Proposal", will be effective in achieving five public health objectives, namely: first, reducing the attractiveness of tobacco products; secondly eliminating the effects of tobacco packaging as a form of advertising and promotion; third, reducing the ability of tobacco packaging to mislead about the harmful effects of smoking; fourth, increasing the noticeability and effectiveness of mandatory GHWs; and finally, better informing smokers and non-smokers of the risks associated with tobacco use.
These public health objectives in turn, both taken separately, individually and together, and in conjunction with other existing tobacco control measures, are expected to contribute to achieving Singapore's broader tobacco control aims, which include discouraging non-smokers from even picking up smoking, encouraging smokers to quit, and encouraging Singaporeans to adopt a tobacco-free lifestyle. Ultimately, the Government expects that these will lead to positive future public health outcomes such as reduced smoking prevalence.
It is in light of the foregoing that the Government considers the introduction of standardised packaging together with enlarged graphic health warnings to be justified from a public health perspective.
Mr Speaker, allow me now to please highlight the key provisions that are being proposed.
First, clause 3 of the Bill repeals the existing sections 17 and 17A of the Act and substitutes a new section 17, which enables the implementation of standardised packaging for tobacco products. Under the new section 17, all tobacco products, and the packaging or labelling of tobacco products, must comply with every requirement prescribed in subsidiary legislation, including requirements as to size, appearance, design, health warnings and other information to be stated. Also, tobacco products and their packaging or labelling must not bear any trade mark, term, descriptor, figurative or other sign, feature, scent or sound that is prescribed as prohibited, or promotes the tobacco product by any means that is false, misleading, deceptive or likely to create an erroneous impression about its characteristics, health effects, hazards or emissions. The latter is in line with the prohibition under the current section 17A of the Act. The import into Singapore, and the distribution, sale, offer for sale or possession for sale in Singapore, of such non-compliant tobacco products will be made an offence.
In addition, clause 6 of the Bill amends section 37 to empower the Minister of Health to make Regulations with respect to the size, appearance and design of tobacco products and their packaging and labelling, the health warnings and also other information displayed on such products – including the trade marks, terms, descriptors, features, scents and sounds that I mentioned will be prohibited in relation to tobacco products and their packaging and labelling.
As the papers published by my Ministry in support of and response to the public consultations conducted in 2018 have stated, our proposal for Singapore's standardised packaging measures will comprise of two parts. The first will include the removal of all colours, logos, brand images, and promotional information on the retail packaging of tobacco products. All permitted information such as brand names and product names would be required to be displayed in a standard colour and a standard font style. The colour, size, shape, opening and finish of the retail packaging will also be standardised, as will aspects of the appearance of the tobacco product. Secondly, the minimum size of the mandatory Graphic Health Warnings will be increased from the existing 50% to 75% of all specified tobacco product packaging surfaces. Following the passage of this Bill – should this Bill be passed – subsidiary legislation will be made to implement the SP proposal, which will then replace the current Tobacco (Control of Advertisements and Sale) (Labelling) Regulations 2012.
One of the key features of the SP Proposal is the prohibition on the use of any branding and that includes the logos, colours and other features associated with the tobacco brand, advertising and promotional elements, from being displayed on tobacco product packaging or the products themselves. This is the case except for brand names and product names that will be required to be displayed in a standard font and colour, as I mentioned. There have been concerns expressed that this prohibition would unduly impinge on the industry's intellectual property (IP) rights and would not be consistent with international IP law. Let me address this point.
The Government maintains its strong commitment to the protection of IP rights. It is also our view that the SP Proposal is consistent with Singapore's international obligations in relation to intellectual property rights. Tobacco companies' trade marks do not give them absolute rights to use their trade marks. Those rights are subject to legitimate government regulation. In this regard, it is also worth noting that a dispute settlement Panel of the World Trade Organization (WTO) has found that Australia's introduction of standardised packaging measures was not inconsistent with its international obligations under various WTO agreements, including the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) and the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) Agreement. The measures proposed in Australia were not dissimilar to what is being proposed in this Bill.
Nonetheless, as a further assurance to rights-holders that the SP Proposal will not affect their ability to otherwise maintain and enforce their IP rights, clause 7 of the Bill introduces new provisions which will make it clear that the implementation of standardised packaging in Singapore will not affect the registrability and registration of tobacco-related trade marks and designs under the Trade Marks Act and the Registered Designs Act. Clause 2 of the Bill inserts a new definition of "trade mark" to clarify that the term has the same meaning as that in the Trade Marks Act.
As mentioned, clause 6 confers on the Minister the power to make subsidiary legislation setting out the details of the packaging measures. The key specifications were set out in the public consultation paper on the SP Proposal, which was published in February last year. In particular, it was made clear that the proposed measures would include standardising both the internal and the external surfaces of all retail packages, standardising the shape and dimensions of the retail package, and standardising the branding and product information allowed on retail packaging, including location, typeface, colours and size.
We recognise and acknowledge that the introduction of standardised packaging will have an impact on tobacco and other related industries. Nevertheless, the positive objectives as well as the public health outcomes that the SP Proposal is expected to achieve warrants its introduction. Should this Bill be passed, to facilitate smooth implementation of the new measures, we will be meeting with manufacturers, importers, distributors and retailers of cigarettes, cigars and other tobacco products retailed in Singapore to brief them on the proposed specifications for the standardised layouts for tobacco product packaging and other operational issues. Sufficient notice will also be given to the industry of the finalised specifications, and prior to the new requirements taking effect, manufacturers and retailers will be permitted to start producing and selling standardised packs alongside existing packs. This "sell through" period will allow retailers to clear their existing stocks of branded tobacco products and ease the implementation burden.
Next, I will touch on several other amendments in the Bill.
Clause 5 of the Bill amends section 34 of the Act, to allow compoundable offences to be compounded for a sum not exceeding the lower of one half of the amount of the maximum fine prescribed for the offence or $5,000. The latter amount is increased from the current $2,000, which has been an amount which has not been raised since the Act was first enacted more than 25 years ago. This proposed increase aims to regain parity with similar provisions in other legislation and to ensure that the deterrent remains effective.
Clause 4 of the Bill amends section 18 of the Act, to increase the maximum fines for an offence under that section from $5,000 to $10,000 for a first offence; and from $10,000 to $20,000 for a person who has any previous qualifying conviction. This aligns the penalties under section 18 with the maximum fines for similarly serious offences pertaining to the importation, distribution, retail and possession of prohibited tobacco products and imitation tobacco products under sections 15 and 16 of the Act, respectively.
Mr Speaker, Sir, smoking is a major cause of ill-health and premature death in Singapore. The Government is committed to reducing the serious harm that tobacco products cause to individual Singaporeans and to the nation's public health. Our long-standing public health objective is to promote and move towards a tobacco-free society and it is to this end that we have consistently adopted a multi-pronged approach to tobacco control.
We further recognise that continuing efforts in tobacco control are necessary to sustain the declines in smoking rates and also bring the overall smoking rate to a level that is as low as possible.
Based on our review of the evidence and the feedback, MOH is of the view that there are convincing grounds to believe that the SP Proposal is likely to achieve its public health objectives and, ultimately, is likely to operate alongside other existing and possible future tobacco control measures to contribute towards promoting public health through the reduction of the prevalence of smoking in Singapore and thereby constitute a significant step towards Singapore becoming a tobacco-free society.
When introduced, the SP Proposal will form part of a comprehensive suite of tobacco-control measures in Singapore. It will operate alongside other existing and possible future tobacco-control measures to contribute towards our Government's obligations under the FCTC and towards reducing prevalence of smoking in Singapore. This would constitute a significant step towards Singapore's long-standing public health objective of promoting and moving towards a tobacco-free society. I seek Members' support for this Bill. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.
: Mr Speaker, I rise in strong support of the Bill, as I have in the past in support of legislative measures that will reduce smoking rates in Singapore. Over the past few years, we have made important strides in curbing the pernicious influence of smoking, through point of display bans, raising the minimum age for smoking, and restricting public areas where smoking is permitted.
I believe that plain, or standard packaging, will prove to be another nail in the coffin for smoking, a habit which has brought grief and misery through ill health to generations of smokers and their loved ones.
The evidence that plain packaging reduces the allure of cigarettes and so reduces improve smoking initiation and may even improve smoking cessation rates, is substantial and convincing. The post-implementation data from Australia, which was the first country to introduce standard packaging for tobacco products in 2012, and also from France, reinforces the efficacy of such a measure. Tobacco companies and the lobby groups associated with them have decried that plain packaging would have little effect on smoking rates except to make life more vexatious for retailers and their customers, but their robust efforts to fight against standard packaging, for example, by launching lawsuits against Australia, proves that this is otherwise. The tobacco industry is running scared, thus underlining the potential impact of standard packaging legislation on smoking rates.
With the passing of this amendment, Singapore will join several countries besides Australia who have already enacted this legislation, and many other countries are expected to follow. Standard packaging is a measure that is endorsed by the World Health Organization (WHO), which in 2016, on World No Tobacco Day, exhorted all countries to prepare to introduce plain packaging for tobacco products.
There are two concerns that have been raised about plain packaging or standard packaging that I would like to ask the Minister to address, so as to reassure the House that these potential consequences will not come to bear.
First, concerns have been raised that standard packaging of cigarettes and tobacco products could lead to the phenomenon of "down trading", where smokers will just switch to cheaper products as it would be harder to distinguish between various products. This could conversely lead to cheaper products increasing market share and may, in theory, lead to increased smoking due to cheaper products and more affordable products coming to the forefront.
Second, concerns have also been raised that plain packaging could facilitate counterfeiting of cigarettes. Is there any evidence for this concern, and what are the measures to ensure that plain packaging does not play into the hands of counterfeiters?
I look forward to the Ministry's responses on these points, and I support the Bill.
: Mr Speaker, I support the introduction of plain packaging for tobacco. Australia was the first country to introduced plain packaging requirement for tobacco in 2011 though the idea appears to have originated from New Zealand.
In recent years, quite a few countries have passed legislation to require plain packaging for tobacco such as New Zealand, France, UK, Ireland, Norway, Slovenia, Canada and Uruguay. Other countries are in the process of doing so. I am glad that Singapore is not far behind in this.
According to studies done, the idea of plain packaging is to prevent or reduce any positive association of branding with the consumption of tobacco. It seems that such positive association of branding will attract young people who are new to smoking, even giving such false sense of glamour associated with certain brands.
According to the studies, requiring the use of standard unattractive colours, reducing font sizes for brand name, highlighting or magnifying health warnings, are effective in deterring new smokers. MOH's requirement of health warning by way of graphic images will definitely contribute to the deglamourising of smoking for the young.
According to reports from Australia, the use of plain packaging seemed to have reduced smoking among young people, as people found that their packaging was not attractive. Some even had the impression cigarettes in plain packaging had tasted worse.
Many people picked up smoking when they were young, including in the case of Singapore during National Service. Together with the recent increase in the legal age for smoking to eventually 21 years, I hope that the introduction of plain packaging will, like in Australia or elsewhere, help to discourage more young people from picking up smoking.
On the other hand, we also read of attempts of tobacco companies in other countries to work around the limitations of plain packaging by, for example, introducing features to maintain product appeal, even when so in plain packaging, such as resealable in a foiled preserved freshness and innovative filters. Some had tried to have unique packaging which should not appear to meet the minimum size required for health information on the side or packs. It seems that these design tweaks are important for some of these tobacco companies as they appeal to young adults and may lead to increased sales.
I also read that in some countries, tobacco companies were given a relatively long time to get rid of their existing stocks and to transit to plain packaging and that some companies also deliberately stalled on the introduction of plain packaging or were not cooperative. In neither of these cases, tobacco companies took the opportunity to maximise the publicity of outgoing branding and attempted to desensitise smokers to the change in packaging.
I would like to ask the Senior Minister of State, given the experience of other countries in introducing plain packaging, what are the Government's plans to deter tobacco companies from going around the requirements of the new legislation such as packaging requirements, or even to deal with any attempts by tobacco companies to delay the introduction of new packaging requirements.
I would also like to know what are the Government's plans for the tobacco companies' and retailers' transition to the new packaging. How much time will they have? There should be a good balance struck between giving tobacco companies sufficient transition time but not any longer so that these companies will not have more time to plan their marketing to work around the limitations of the new packaging requirements.
I would also like to ask the Government whether the new rules on plain packaging will be inconsistent with current practice of allowing people to bring in cigarettes from foreign countries by declaring and paying tariffs for such cigarettes. Does the Government intend to introduce changes to the law to deal with any of such inconsistency?
Finally, I would also like to know whether and how the new packaging requirements will affect tobacco companies in limiting their flexibility in the use of cigarette sizes as a way of product differentiation or to target certain segments such as slim size for ladies. Does the Government have any plans to standardise the size of cigarettes being sold? Mr Speaker, I support the Bill.
: Order. I propose to take a break now. I suspend the Sitting and will take the Chair at 3.30 pm.
Sitting accordingly suspended
at 3.10 pm until 3.30 pm.
Sitting resumed at 3.30 pm
: Mr Speaker, Sir, I would like to begin by complimenting the Government’s intensive efforts in discouraging tobacco use in recent years. From expanding no-smoking zones to regulating displays of tobacco sales to increasing the minimum legal age of buying cigarettes and more. The Government has shown its commitment to the tobacco-free movement.
In November last year, the Government revealed plans to standardise the packaging of tobacco. By 2020, tobacco sold in Singapore must be packaged in drab colours, dropping logos, brand images and all other promotional information, while the size of the graphic warning is increased.
This follows in the footsteps of countries like Australia, France, the UK and many others which have adopted similar standardised packaging policies. With today’s Bill, we will be a major step closer to this goal.
The last press release from MOH stated that a transition period will be provided to allow manufacturers and retailers to sell their old stock. How long is this transition period? I am concerned about the vendors who sell cigarettes in the small provision shops and mama shops in the heartlands and the bus stops. Many of the shop keepers are elderly, and they are already facing many challenges to keep their business afloat. Has the Ministry reached out to them to help them understand the new regulations and to check if they would have trouble meeting the established deadlines?
In the meantime, I would like to take the opportunity to urge the Government to consider adding designated smoking points (DSPs) to more places, especially in the heartlands. In the last update on this issue in February 2018 , the Senior Minister of State said she will look into the results of the study of Orchard Road to see how this project can be expanded. However, Orchard Road and the heartlands are rather different in demographic and environment, amongst many other things.
Today, Nee Soon South is covered by 50 DSPs. This cost us about half a million dollars, raised from private donors. But I think it was worth it. We can shield the vulnerable from second hand smoke. Children will also not be over-exposed to the sight of people smoking, preventing the normalising of smoking in their minds. At the same time, smokers’ needs are met too. The reality is that some smokers simply will not quit. They have told me that they appreciate the DSPs. It helps them reduce the times they smoke at home, which exposes their family to second hand smoke, or can lead to disputes with neighbours.
In fact, from time to time, I do receive requests and emails from residents from other parts of Singapore asking for DSPs.
Therefore, I hope the Government will seriously look into having more DSPs in residential areas. Furthermore, I hope the Government will allow the Community Improvement Projects Committee fund to be used for the construction and maintenance of DSPs. I believe DSPs will certainly be win-win for both smokers and non-smokers.
Next, I wish to share my concerns about the increasing popularity of contraband cigarettes. This is inevitable as regulations concerning tobacco get tighter and cigarettes become more expensive. In the past months, the Singapore Police Force has conducted raids turning up large numbers of contraband cigarettes. Industrial areas and foreign-worker dormitories were among the places targeted.
I understand that the Singapore Customs also conducts island wide enforcement operations. While I applaud these organisations for their diligence, I would like to know how these cigarettes were smuggled in, and what is being done about it. I note that the proposed amendments include imposing heavier penalties on illegal import of tobacco products, and I hope that this will serve as some form of deterrence. But what if the couriers working for the syndicate are being assured that their fines would be paid for if caught? Why do we not add in a jail term? A news report in 2017 revealed that illegal syndicates hire foreign workers to deliver the contraband cigarettes. Has there been an improvement in the situation since?
Exposure to cigarettes and smoking among foreign workers is also an issue we should be concerned about.
I hope that the Ministry is working with dormitory operators and contractor companies to reach out to these workers to advise them about the laws concerning smoking in Singapore, and the unhealthy effects of smoking and second-hand smoke. These workers come to Singapore to seek a better living for themselves and their families, and it would be a shame for them to squander the money away on vices and picking up poor health that could have a negative impact on their health in the long run.
In fact, some of these foreign workers are living in our HDB units and smoke along corridor. Just last week, I had a house visit, and a mother shared with me her agony. She has three young children, and the unit beside hers is rented out to several foreign workers. She said that almost every night, they smoke along the corridor, and the smoke drifts to her unit. She was so afraid that the second-hand smoke would have ill effect on the health of her three young children. As a mother, I can fully understand her desire to protect her children. So, in this case. I alerted NEA and asked them to step up enforcement action because smoking along the corridor is not permitted under the current law. On this note, I would like to once again bring up the increasing complaints of neighbours smoking in their own units and the smoke drifting to the neighbours' units and affecting the neighbours. Is the NEA determined to do something about it? Or is the MOH determined to do something about it?
I know that smoking is a personal choice, just like you can have parties in your own home so long as the noise generated do not affect the neighbours. So, you can smoke in your own home, but the smoke should not affect your neighbours. Of course, we hope that the neighbours can be more considerate and think of the neighbours before they light up the cigarette – perhaps make use of the DSPs, or walk further away, but I really hope that the MOH can work with the NEA to come up together to address this issue. In Chinese, please.
I am glad that the Government is continuously introducing new measures to reduce the smoking rate. It is a good idea to ban eye-catching cigarette packaging. I hope the Government can show some understanding towards small provision shops by allowing them sufficient time to sell their old stock.
This amendment will increase the fine on contraband cigarettes. However, successful cigarette-smuggling has big profits in it and, hence, fines are not enough to deter cigarette-smuggling. If we impose jail terms, the deterrent effect will be much stronger.
Although we hope that all can quit smoking, surely there will be some people who cannot kick the habit. I hope that the Government can consider setting up more Designated Smoking Points (DSPs) to protect others from the harmful effects of second-hand smoking. In Yishun South, the feedback on our DSPs is very positive. I hope the Government will allow the Community Improvement Project Committee Fund to be used for the construction and the maintenance of the DSPs.
: I support the Motion.
: Mr Speaker, I rise in support of the Tobacco (Control of Advertisements and Sale) Bill. This proposed move towards clean packaging will align Singapore with the World Health Organisation's Framework Convention on Tobacco Control along with countries such as Australia, France, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, which have also mandated standardised packaging for tobacco products.
I would like to commend the Ministry of Health for its considerable preparatory work in proposing these changes, referencing over 200 studies and holding three rounds of public consultations. Such a concerted effort to stamp out smoking is crucial because it exacts a significant toll on our society, as the Senior Minister of State noted earlier.
Over the last 10 years, Singapore has seen no definitive patterns of sustained decline in smoking prevalence, which has hovered between 12% and 14%.
According to a study published in Asia and the Pacific Policy Studies, smoking prevalence in Singapore approximates 15% among adults and 6% among youths aged 13-15 years old. Notably, research by the Singapore Cancer Society found that 80% of adult smokers in Singapore picked up the habit before reaching 21. Indeed, studies in other parts of the world have shown that people who smoke during adolescence are 16 times more likely to become adult smokers. Given the evidence that early experimentation with smoking is a predictor for smoking dependency in adulthood, we must therefore do our utmost to discourage our young from acquiring this harmful habit.
I would like to therefore take this opportunity to draw the attention of the House to an issue of growing concern worldwide – this is the circumvention of restrictions on tobacco advertising by multinational tobacco companies through the use of insidious social media campaigns. These campaigns capitalise on the appeal of social media influencers through photographs featuring these young role models smoking in cool venues while wearing trendy clothing, accompanied by catchy hashtags. Deceptively, however, no explicit mention is made of the tobacco companies behind these campaigns. Such visually arresting content seeks to depict smoking as a normal practice among young people, and indeed showcases smoking as a glamourous and desirable lifestyle choice.
In the United States, the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids has led several organisations including the American Academy of Paediatrics and the American Lung Association to mount a petition requesting action by the United States Federal Trade Commission. This petition asserts that tobacco companies are actively promoting smoking via hundreds of thousands of images, hashtags and videos shared by young people on social media platforms such Instagram, Facebook and Twitter. The reach of such content is sizeable. Research by the petitioners found that a mere 123 hashtags linked to these tobacco companies’ social media campaigns were viewed 8.8 billion times in the US and 25 billion times worldwide just on Twitter alone.
These multinational tobacco companies have initiated such media campaigns in numerous countries throughout Asia, Europe, the Middle East, and Central, North and South America, roping in high profile youth influencers in each country. Closer to home, tobacco companies have funded such campaigns in neighbouring countries, such as Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand. Influencers are given strict instructions on which cigarettes to feature, how to take natural photographs which do not resemble advertisements, when they should post these images for optimal audience engagement, as well as the hashtags that they must use. In one particular country, the influencers were even told to conceal the health warnings on the cigarette packs before posting the images. Such shady tactics are calculated to mislead young people into thinking that these images are organic social media content that simply reflect youth culture.
While there is fortunately no evidence to show that social media influencers in Singapore have been targeted by tobacco companies in this way, the porous and borderless nature of the internet means that young Singaporeans can nevertheless be exposed to such images. Many social media influencers also have a global fan base so even campaigns originating from well beyond our shores can appeal to our youths if influencers with a strong following in Singapore are mobilised. After all, Singaporeans are avid social media users, with young Singaporeans being the most active.
Of particular pertinence to Singapore is the fact that most of these social media campaigns promoting smoking almost exclusively use English even when it is not the lingua franca of the country from which these campaigns originate. The highly visual nature of social media platforms such as Instagram, Facebook and Snapchat also means that language is essentially no barrier to the communicative impact of such images.
This is yet another issue, in addition to online falsehoods, that shows how the extensive reach of big technology companies with a global presence has significant ramifications on society. Because of the lack of transparency surrounding the algorithms that determine what content social media platforms serve us, we cannot discern why we may be seeing more of particular forms of content. Neither can we exert more active control over our social media feeds should we so choose. Young people who like, share or comment on images portraying negative behaviours as hip and trendy, with particular hashtags, may be unwittingly served more of such images on their social media feeds.
Such transnational social media campaigns that actively promote smoking will undo the value and hard work of anti-tobacco legislation and enforcement that have been in place worldwide for decades.
Hence, I would like to ask the Senior Minister of State whether there will be greater effort made to track the use of social media by tobacco and e-cigarette companies for promoting their wares in Singapore through such underhanded methods.
I would also like to ask whether the Ministry will work with the Advertising Standards Authority of Singapore to establish more concrete guidelines around the responsibilities of social media influencers with regard to full disclosure in cases of sponsored content by tobacco and e-cigarette companies.
I would further like to suggest that the Ministry works with its counterparts in ASEAN and countries further afield, as well as the World Health Organisation, to take action against this egregious and damaging practice of using social media campaigns to circumvent restrictions against tobacco advertisements.
In addition, I would also like to suggest that the Minister engages with big technology companies to remind them of the contributory and supportive role they should play in helping to minimise young people’s exposure to images portraying smoking in a positive light. These companies possess the ability to alter their algorithms to stem the spread of such images, in the same way that they have algorithms to weed out obscene and extremist content. Mr Speaker, in Chinese please:
Although this Bill will help promote plain tobacco packaging, for the young, curbing smoking at the sales stage may already be too late. The young can be easily influenced by the positive image of smoking created by social media marketing. Such marketing is sponsored by multinational tobacco companies. Although there are no such marketing campaigns in Singapore thus far, the borderless nature of the Internet means that our young can come into contact with these positive images of smoking through social media, such as Instagram and Snapchat.
Hence, social media has become a new area where our health authorities must battle the marketing strategy of depicting smoking as a desirable lifestyle choice. MOH must work with other countries and the WHO to take action to fight this unhealthy trend.
:
In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I hereby register my concerns about the deleterious trends surrounding novel and surreptitious ways of promoting smoking and vaping. I strongly support this Bill and hope that the Ministry will monitor such covert marketing to Singapore’s youths, with a view to an even stronger Bill in future.
: In Malay, please.
Mr Speaker, it is hoped that standardised packaging for cigarettes will, firstly, make it less attractive to smokers, especially the younger generation and those who want to try smoking and have just started smoking; second, reduce the impact of advertisements and promotions; third, further strengthen messages about the negative impact and dangers of smoking; fourth, create clearer graphics on the risks and warnings about smoking on its packaging.
These measures will hopefully further reduce the number of smokers and also stop those who intend to start smoking. It is also in line with the WHO Convention to further reduce the number of smokers globally.
But will these measures have an impact, especially on our Malay community? They have the highest number of smokers at the national level.
A study by the Institute of Mental Health (IMH) in 2010 showed that 4.5% of Singaporeans are addicted to smoking and 20% of them are Malays, which represents a higher proportion compared to our population figures as a minority group. What can we do to manage this situation? Programmes like the I QUIT Programme/Challenge to Quit Smoking during the Fasting Month of Ramadan, advertisements and others, as well as various measures by the Government, seem to have lost their effect. Health statistics show that the number of our community members who are unhealthy, in terms of having chronic diseases and a smoking habit as one of the risks, are worrying. Our Malay male smokers, for instance, start smoking at a young age, during their teens and even while in school. This is unhealthy! Parents who smoke introduce the risk of second hand smoke on their children and family members, and this will further increase their risk.
We must unite our efforts to address this problem together. It is hoped that these messages, and the age limit to buy cigarettes, as well as negative psychological messages, will have an impact on this complex smoking problem.
: Standardised packaging: is it going to work for Singapore? We have had all kinds of efforts put in and I have to commend MOH for all the initiatives that have been undertaken over the years. We have seen the literature from several countries and have seen how this implementation has been rather lukewarm and, in fact, controversial in some countries. So, are we still going ahead with it?
Well, in considering this, it brings us to the root cause of, firstly, the association between cigarette smoking and cigarette pack designs, the pack attributes and also people’s choices. Secondly, it is about perceptions about the Standardised Packaging versus the usual packaging. And, thirdly, the potential impact of the graphic warnings and advisories. And there have been studies that have been quoted, both pro and also against this.
As regulators, we must also ask themselves in planning programmes and enforcements which include the link between package and design with quality, with taste, with cost, with social appeal, with attempt to start and try smoking and also the ease of quitting and, perhaps, the perceived harm amongst the different age groups and the different generations.
The issue and the problem lies in the fact that these factors affect people differently and unpredictably as well. It is coloured by their upbringing, by their life experiences, by their perceptions, by their inculcation of educational messages into their neural networks and also their psychological resilience and make-up. Those are, indeed, complex elements for us to really control.
After knowing all these factors, are we going ahead with this Bill?
My answer would be yes. Why? Because we owe it to those who will be impacted, to those who will benefit, to those who will quit, to those who will not start and to those who are affected by other people smoking around them.
Therefore, it may be short sighted to actually just view this Bill as a single entity. It is something that should be seen in the bigger context of Singapore, as a clean and green garden city, in the context of making the presence of smoking restriction framework in our public places common with the fact that we have age restriction limits to purchasing of cigarette and tobacco products and, of course, our ongoing educational efforts and I QUIT programmes that have been implemented over years and generations and all these are also important because we want to make sure that our younger generations stay healthy for years to come. In fact, one of the programmes that is targeting the younger generations will be the smoke-free tobacco generation that is for those who are born in the Year 2000 and beyond to actually stop smoking and I think we have been quite active with this programme in our schools and with teenagers as well.
So, therefore, when we consider all these put together, hopefully, it will be more positive than negative. So, Sir, I support the Bill.
: Sir, I stand in support of this Bill that will contribute to further reducing the smoking rate and promote healthier living in Singapore.
Studies from other countries that have implemented standardised packaging, such as those in Australia and the UK, consistently highlight the deterrent effect this measure can have upon smoking. The implementation of standardised packaging is a huge and positive leap in the right direction. That being said, I would like to seek some clarifications on certain aspects of the Bill.
First, I would like to seek clarification on the increase in the maximum fines that may be imposed for offences relating to licenses required for dealing with tobacco products. Clause 4 of the Bill amends section 18(5) of the Act to increase the fines for an offence under that provision.
Could the Minister for Health clarify the rationale behind the increase in maximum fines for such offences? Is there evidence, for instance from studies conducted in other countries, that such an increase in maximum fines would be effective in deterring offenders, especially in the case of repeat offenders?
Further, why have these fines been increased by 100%, both in the case of offenders and repeat offenders? Are there reasons as to why they have been increased by this specific amount? Has there also been an increase in recent times for such offences?
Second, under the new section 17, the Bill requires that all tobacco products that are imported, distributed and sold in Singapore adhere to the requirements prescribed under the Principal Act. Can the Minister clarify exactly how these requirements would be enforced? Would the original powers of police and authorised officials be adequate, particularly given the introduction of a considerable measure such as standardised packaging?
Australia, the first country to introduce standardised packaging, set up a "Tobacco Plain Packaging Enforcement Committee" comprising of representatives from the Ministry of Health and the National Measurement Institute. This committee monitors potential contraventions and decides what type of punitive actions should be taken based on the contraventions. Such a committee could be particularly useful in ensuring that the standardised packaging proposal is implemented smoothly in Singapore. Does the Ministry have any plans to set up a similar enforcement committee to ensure that there is a separate institutionalised body responsible for all matters concerning enforcement of standardised packaging?
Finally, while I am aware of the potential positive effects standardised packaging can have on reducing the smoking rates, I am concerned about the measure’s potential effectiveness, specifically in reducing the ability of tobacco packaging to mislead consumers on the harms of smoking.
According to MOH's Press Release on 31 October last year, standardised packaging is intended to fulfill five main objectives. These include reducing the packaging's potential to mislead consumers on the harmful effects of smoking, highlighting graphic health warnings, and raising awareness about the risks of smoking.
However, according to the primary study used in the Australian government’s review of its standardised packaging programme, researchers found that the measure did not adequately address the goal of reducing the ability of tobacco to mislead smokers on the harmful effects of smoking. Further, the study found that there was no change in smokers' misperceptions that certain types of tobacco products were better for their health.
Could the Minister clarify exactly how and why standardised packaging would reduce the potential of tobacco packaging to mislead consumers on the harmful effects of smoking then?
In addition, the study also discussed the inclusion of colour names in brand variant names after the implementation of standardised plain packaging in Australia. As standardised packaging in Australia did not limit the use of colour names in brand variant names, companies began including colour names to evoke the sensations or feelings previously connoted by the colour on the package. For instance, a product, which was known as "Dunhill Distinct" in the past, had its brand variant name changed to "Dunhill Distinct Blue" after the introduction of standardised packaging. Such efforts had the effect of reinforcing the differences between tobacco products which further contributes to the misconception that certain product variants were less harmful than others.
Given the potential ramifications, which can result from certain brand variant names, could the Ministry consider vetting and setting restrictions on certain brand variant names? For instance, based on the example I have used, would it be possible to prohibit the use of colour names in brand variant names?
Sir, notwithstanding my clarifications, I stand in support of this Bill. This Bill signals the Government’s firm willingness to work towards creating a tobacco-free Singapore and I wholeheartedly support these efforts.
: Mr Speaker, Sir, first of all, let me wish all the Members in the House a Happy Lunar New Year and "人日快乐".
Mr Speaker, Sir, I am in full support of the Ministry's proposal to implement standardised packaging and enlarged graphic health warnings for tobacco products. As various research projects have found, such packaging will help to reduce the appeal of tobacco products and seems effective in reducing smoking in countries when standardised packaging was introduced.
I share the Ministry's concern that after so many years of public education, the number of smokers in Singapore has not actually decreased as much as we hope for. We have to invest more effort into solving this addiction problem, especially among the younger smokers.
Some of my residents have asked me if the Government would consider banning the import of tobacco products all together. We had discussed this option in this House before and concluded that a hard ban would not be advisable as this would just drive the buying and selling underground, and encourage smuggling, particularly from across the Causeway.
It is better, for now, to allow tobacco products to remain on the shelves of our shops and supermarkets while removing the customised designs of each brand and product. Standardised packaging will remove the illusions of their (purported) attributes and enable shoppers to see them as they are – tobacco – nothing more and nothing less.
I would like to ask the Minister if the Ministry has details of smoker profiles in each age group. Since the producers were required to include graphic warnings on the cigarette packs sold, have the different health warnings been effective?
Will the Ministry consider requiring the producers to restrict the percentage of nicotine content and other harmful contents? Will the Ministry consider requiring all media to carry reminders of the harmful effect of tobacco in all screenings of videos, movies or drama productions where the scenes of smoking cannot be edited and cut?
: Senior Minister of State Edwin Tong.
: Mr Speaker, I thank the various Members for speaking up in support of the Bill. I will now address the Members' queries on the Bill.
At its heart, this Bill recognises that more needs to be done to achieve the sustained declines in smoking prevalence, and I reiterate the statistic that I mentioned at the start of this session, which is that one in five men smoke daily, higher than in many developed countries. That is a statistic we do not want to see and want to arrest and reverse. Tobacco use, including smoking, remains, therefore, a significant public health problem in Singapore.
Our long-standing public health objective is to promote and move towards a tobacco-free society, a point that several Members have reiterated earlier as well. This Bill is another in the suite of tools we have introduced, and which we will continue to introduce as necessary, to control tobacco consumption.
Prof Fatimah Lateef has made the point that it would be short-sighted to view this Bill as a single entity. I agree entirely. The SP Proposal must therefore be seen in the context of Singapore’s various multi-pronged approach to tobacco control. Our approach includes a comprehensive mix of strategies, and that includes public education, the provision of smoking cessation services, taxation, and legislation, amongst other things, to control tobacco labelling, advertising, and promotion, smoking in public places and sales of cigarettes to minors, all of which work in tandem to control tobacco consumption.
Mr Louis Ng has asked for clarification on how standardised packaging can be expected to reduce the potential of tobacco packaging to mislead consumers on the harmful effects of smoking. In particular, he suggests that certain studies found that Australia’s standardised packaging measures did not adequately address the goal of reducing the ability of tobacco packaging to mislead smokers on the harmful effects of smoking. I would like to address those points in some detail.
There is a broad and extensive range of international and local research and evidence which shows that standardised packaging is likely to be effective in meeting public health objectives – the five points which I have outlined earlier. MOH has reviewed over 200 primary studies, reviews and materials relating to standardised packaging and enlarged graphic health warnings originating from a wide range of sources and countries, and also across multiple disciplines, such as public health, marketing, psychology, economics and econometrics. MOH has also taken into consideration the feedback from our several public consultations in formulating our final assessment of the evidence pertaining to the SP Proposal.
Studies internationally have found that through the elimination of logo and design elements, plain packs were perceived as less attractive, less attention-grabbing, and less likely to be purchased by youths, compared with branded and novel packs. Indeed, the US Surgeon-General’s Report in 2012 concluded that "there is strong, consistent evidence that advertising and promotion influence the factors that lead directly to tobacco use by adolescents, including the initiation of cigarette smoking as well as its continuation".
Therefore, addressing the labelling and packaging of tobacco products is an important step towards reducing smoking uptake and prevalence. This is also aligned to what the WHO itself recommends under the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC). The WHO concluded in 2016 that, "there is a large body of empirical evidence… for introduction of standardised packaging", and that this evidence "suggests that standardised packaging makes health warnings, restrictions on tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship, as well as restrictions on misleading tobacco packaging more effective".
In April 2015, after the introduction of the measures in Australia, the Australian government published its Post-Implementation Review data in a series of peer-reviewed journal papers. The studies concluded that the objectives of Australia's plain packaging measure had been met and again, I quote, "plain packaging is severely restricting the ability of the pack to communicate and create appeal with young people and adults", and "plain packaging [is] fulfilling its core aims of reducing appeal, particularly among young adults, and increasing warning salience."
Indeed, studies in Australia after the introduction of plain packaging also found that there were behavioural outcomes associated with greater quit intention, and also negative feelings towards tobacco products. For instance, in one study, the number of quit attempts rose after implementation of the measure. The number of calls to Quitline also rose by 78%, peaking at four weeks post-implementation, and sustained right through 43 weeks post-implementation. There was also evidence that smokers avoided displaying the standardised packs and there was greater avoidance behaviour regarding the graphic health warnings.
While it is of course very challenging to seek to isolate the impact of any one single tobacco-control policy, it is noteworthy that in the Australian experience, they have had access to a large, granular dataset collected over an extended period of time. Analysis of this dataset indicates that over a period of 34 months, after accounting for other tobacco control measures, Australia's standardised packaging measure contributed to a 0.55 percentage point decline in smoking prevalence that was above and beyond existing trends. 0.55% may seem small. Nonetheless, it is still impactful. In Australia, it meant 108,000 fewer smokers.
Together with our own experts, we reviewed this study in some detail. We have access to the dataset itself, so we did not just review their conclusions. We looked at their datasets in some detail, and we have found that its methodology and conclusions were thorough, reliable and credible. To put the results that they have achieved in context, if you were to apply that in Singapore, at the same rate that they have achieved in Australia, it would mean a reduction of 15,000 fewer smokers here. All of these are very useful indicators which tell us that the SP Proposal that we have put up is the correct measure to take.
Overall, the evidence supports the conclusion that the SP Proposal is likely, alongside other tobacco-control measures, to promote public health through the reduction of the prevalence of smoking in Singapore. Whilst there can be no precise prediction on future behavioural trends, or how long the impact might take to be felt, or whether other measures might become necessary to achieve even better tobacco control, the current evidence points substantially in favour of there being significant public health benefit in Singapore with the introduction of the SP Proposal.
Mr Gan Thiam Poh asked about the effectiveness of health warnings. The aim of graphic health warnings on tobacco products is precisely to communicate health risk and also to motivate tobacco users and, possibly, potential users, to either quit or reduce, or not even start consumption. This question has previously been addressed by MOH in this House. Members will know that there is a strong body of international evidence demonstrating the impact of graphic health warnings on knowledge of health effects, thoughts about quitting, use of Quitlines, and ultimately on quitting attempts.
Studies from Australia, Canada, the US and the UK have shown impact on behaviours, such as noticing cigarette warnings and forgoing cigarettes, predict subsequent quitting attempts among individual smokers. For example, a systematic review of 32 studies from 20 countries, including some high-income countries, with more than 800,000 participants found that graphic health warnings are associated with increased Quitline calls, reduced smoking consumption, increased quit attempts, increased short-term smoking cessation and reduced smoking prevalence.
Locally, in Singapore, a 2005 study by HPB evaluating the impact of the introduction of graphic health warnings showed that 50% of participants were more concerned and worried about their health after seeing the graphic health warnings. This also led to behaviour changes where one in four smokers were motivated to quit smoking and made efforts to abstain from smoking. Non-smokers were also affected and more than half spoke up to advise their friends and loved ones to quit smoking. This outcome and finding is also consistent with international evidence on the impact of graphic health warnings.
The evidence also suggests that the use of large and noticeable graphic health warnings can reduce smoking initiation. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends that countries should consider increasing the size of graphic health warnings to cover more than 50% of tobacco packaging and replacing the images on such warnings every two to three years to increase their effectiveness. So you rotate and change the images because, otherwise, one becomes desensitised and dulled to the images. This recommendation is also in part why we have proposed that the graphic health warnings be increased to 75% of the cigarette packaging.
I would add on this point, finally, that in the dispute on plain packaging against Australia at the World Trade Organization (WTO), that I mentioned earlier, the panel concluded, and I quote, that "there is some econometric evidence suggesting that standardised packaging, together with the enlarged graphic health warnings implemented at the same time contributed to the reduction in overall smoking prevalence as well as in cigar smoking prevalence, observed after their entry into force." So, it is a point that we have also leaned on and taken notice of in arriving at our measures.
Dr Chia Shi-Lu asked whether the SP Proposal would lead to "down-trading" and an increase in counterfeit tobacco products. Down-trading describes a phenomenon in which there is a shift from more expensive tobacco products or brands to lower priced alternatives in the market. The tobacco industry has contended that standardised packaging will result in this phenomenon, which will in turn lead to an increase in overall tobacco demand or consumption because consumers buy more products when prices are lower.
We have looked at this with advice from our experts. This shift towards lower priced tobacco products in the Australian market was observed even before the introduction of standardised packaging, and is also observed in all other high-income countries, not just in Australia, as smoking prevalence decreases.
Much of this is attributable to pricing strategies of the tobacco industry itself, which has been known to increase the price differential between low and higher priced brands when passing on tax increases to the customer.
Our own assessment is that any acceleration in trends towards down-trading in Australia is likely to be largely attributable to the actions of the tobacco industry in differentially passing on the increases in taxes in the years following the implementation of standardised packaging. Correspondingly, the contribution of standardised packaging to down-trading is likely to only be a modest one, if at all. Any impact that down-trading may have on increasing overall demand may also be addressed by policy measures to increase the absolute price and hence reduce affordability of low-price brands, for example, by increasing tobacco taxes, if necessary.
Regarding counterfeit tobacco products, our assessment is that the introduction of standardised packaging is unlikely to materially contribute towards an increase in illicit trade in tobacco products in Singapore. We arrived at this view after having carefully considered the arguments and evidence submitted by the tobacco industry players themselves on illicit trade to the public consultation, as well as of course, the experience in Australia.
Much of the evidence submitted was in relation to Australia's experience, largely because they have had several years since they introduced the measures, have gathered a large amount of data, and also looked at the experience, in some way, with the benefit of hindsight. The same evidence was submitted to the WTO Panel, which reviewed it in detail. The WTO Panel concluded that the evidence did not demonstrate that the introduction of standardised packaging in Australia had led to an increased trade or consumption of illicit tobacco so as to undermine standardised packaging's contribution to the overall objective of improving public health.
The local context is also important. The prevailing form of illicit tobacco in Singapore is that of contraband, which is genuine but duty-unpaid cigarettes, as opposed to counterfeit cigarettes. Due to the relatively small Singapore market for cigarettes, counterfeit cigarette manufacturers are not incentivised to counterfeit cigarettes for sale in Singapore.
In Singapore, illicit tobacco products are sold on the black market rather than at licensed tobacco retailers. The aim of counterfeiting is to "pass off" counterfeit products as the genuine article. There has been no evidence submitted in the consultations to MOH to show that buyers on the black market will choose counterfeit products in standardised packaging over contraband, genuine products, and that really is assessment that one has to make.
Overall, therefore there is no compelling reason to believe that counterfeit products and illicit trade will increase with the introduction of standardised packaging. We will, however, work with Customs and other relevant agencies to continue to monitor the situation regarding illicit trade and step up enforcement and educational efforts as necessary.
Er Dr Lee Bee Wah has asked whether MOH will be reaching out to retailers. I think her concern, quite rightly, was with the retailers who may have an existing stock of the older non-standardised packaging tobacco products and she asked if we could reach out to them, to help them understand the new standardised packaging requirements, hear their feedback, and also to understand any concerns they might have on the implementation deadlines and operationalising of the implementation. She also asked about the length of the transition period. These are very all pertinent issues to mitigate any harsh effects there might be, against the retailers, particularly those who operate smaller set ups.
As mentioned earlier, should this Bill be passed, MOH will brief stakeholders within the industry on the proposed specifications for the standardised layouts for tobacco product packaging so the rules and requirements will be made clear. In addition, we will also discuss other operational implementation issues that they might have. Tobacco retailers will be invited to these briefings as well.
As for the transition period that Er Dr Lee Bee Wah raised, other countries that have introduced standardised packaging typically give the industry three months to a year from the publication of the requirements for standardised packaging to the start of the sell-through period that I mentioned earlier.
In Singapore, for past changes to tobacco packaging, for example, the Graphic Health Warnings change, we have provided advance notice of somewhere between nine to 12 months lead time. We will provide something similar for the SP Proposal.
On enforcement, Mr Louis Ng asked about this question and suggested that MOH consider setting up a separate institutionalised body to enforce our standardised packaging measure – similar to Australia's "Tobacco Plain Packaging Enforcement Committee".
The enforcement of Singapore's tobacco control law already falls under a specialised regulatory agency – namely, the Health Sciences Authority of Singapore. The HSA enforces the labelling requirements for tobacco products, including the existing Graphic Health Warnings, the health information, as well as the sale restriction messages on tobacco packaging. This is usually done at the importer, manufacturer and also the distributor level. Thus far, we have found the existing regulatory regime to be adequate and sufficient but we will no doubt keep in mind Mr Louis Ng's suggestion as we consider the details of implementation, if this Bill is passed.
Prof Lim Sun Sun raised some very valid points on what happens with the proliferation of social media. These are all issues that we have to grapple with, not just in tobacco control but overall in terms of the messaging, and the type of information that one gleans and gathers on the social media, which is very much and very quickly proliferating. We have two responses. The first is, under our current Tobacco Control of Advertisements and Sales Act, tobacco-related advertisements in all forms of media are already banned and that can include advertisements which emanate from foreign countries overseas but which are viewed or shown in Singapore. The law is clear on this – we prohibit it but obviously with so many different influencers and the examples that Prof Lim herself cited, where one can artistically and somewhat perhaps, very carefully, design the way in which the images are portrayed, this makes detection and therefore enforcement a lot more difficult. Nonetheless, we will take on board the suggestion to work more closely with social media companies and the tech giants to ensure that this same message is passed through, which leads to my next point.
HPB already runs a very extensive public education campaign. That is also done online and that is also done using social media. So apart from enforcing it through the rules which we have in place, we also want to amplify our public education outreach on the same platforms with the same reach and hopefully to the same target audience as what these tobacco companies are trying to do. We will continue to do so and see how we can take on board Prof Lim Sun Sun's suggestions as to how we can work more closely with these companies particularly on the point about algorithms, which is entirely valid.
Mr Louis Ng has asked us to clarify the rationale behind the increase in maximum fines for offences under section 18 of the Act. Section 18 is the provision that requires any person dealing with tobacco products and that includes the importing, distributing, selling and offering for sale in Singapore to hold a valid license issued by the HSA. As mentioned earlier, the aim is to align the maximum penalties in section 18 with the maximum fines for similarly serious comparable offences pertaining to the importation, distribution, retail and possession of prohibited tobacco products and imitation tobacco products under sections 15 and 16 of the Act, respectively. With the alignment of penalties, we make it clear that offences related to unlicenced dealing of tobacco products are considered as serious offences to the same degree as offences relating to prohibited tobacco products.
Mr Gan Thiam Poh asked if we have the profile of smokers in each age group. Based on our population health surveys, we do have information on the general demographic profile of smokers by age group and that is in part why we are concerned with the initiation of smokers, especially at a young age. The Health Promotion Board uses such information to customise and also target the education programmes and smoking cessation interventions for specific demographic groups, in settings such as schools, workplaces, healthcare and also in the community.
For instance, HPB has developed the Ramadan I Quit smoking cessation programme, to meet the specific needs of the community. Roadshows are held in various festive bazaars annually to provide cessation support to smokers. So, it is not just the campaign on the awareness, but also providing these smokers who are keen to stop with our support for the cessation programme. In 2018, over 4,000 participants from all ethnic groups pledged to quit smoking. HPB has worked closely with MOE as well as with Institutes of Higher Learning to increase education and awareness to prevent youths from taking up tobacco products, or for those who have started, to stop. HPB is further leveraging social media to better engage youth on the benefits of a smoke-free lifestyle, and to persuade the young to stay smoke-free.
Er Dr Lee Bee Wah has urged the Government, again, to consider designated smoking points in more places, especially in residential areas. This does not quite concern standardised packaging but nonetheless I understand that my colleagues at MEWR are monitoring the effectiveness of the Orchard No-Smoking Zone before considering whether to replicate the concept elsewhere, perhaps in the estates that Er Dr Lee Bee Wah mentioned. We will ask them to consider Er Dr Lee Bee Wah's suggestion to study the effectiveness of the DSPs in other areas, and the feasibility of piloting a similar No-Smoking Zone concept in residential estates.
Er Dr Lee Bee Wah also asked what we are doing to tackle cigarette smuggling. Singapore Customs' enforcement teams already, as you know, conduct operations to interdict supply and distribution of duty-unpaid cigarettes. Customs work closely with other law enforcement agencies such as the Immigration and Checkpoints Authority and Singapore Police Force to interdict cigarette smuggling into Singapore, and also enforce against illegal street peddlers and end-consumers to suppress street-level duty-unpaid cigarette activities. Customs also organises targeted outreach programmes and community road shows and of course, finally, members of the public can report illegal activities to the Singapore Customs through a 24-hour hotline, by email, or on the mobile app, Customs@SG.
Er Dr Lee Bee Wah also suggested that penalties for unlicensed import of tobacco products under the Tobacco Act can include a jail term under the Tobacco Act itself. Currently, selling or dealing in duty-unpaid tobacco are already serious offences under the Customs Act. Offenders face a fine of up to 40 times the amount of duty evaded, or up to six years' jail or both. The penalties are severe and they are designed to deter those who may be thinking of engaging in such activities.
Mr Dennis Tan Lip Fong asked two questions related to this. The first is, whether or not, once our standardised packaging measure is in place, one could still import non-compliant cigarette packs into Singapore simply by paying the duty. If you look at the proposed amendments, no importation of any packs not in compliance with the standardised packaging regulations will be allowed. So, whether duty is paid or unpaid, the fact of the matter is that if the packaging for the purposes of importation into Singapore does not comply with the regulations, then that would not be allowed. The only exception to importation into Singapore for non-compliant packages will be for the purposes of re-exporting out of Singapore without coming into the Singapore market.
Mr Tan also asked if we regulate the size of the cigarettes themselves, presumably because, with the standardised packaging measures in place, one could foreseeably see tobacco companies distinguishing themselves by having different cigarette sizes or lengths. Mr Tan might wish to note that under the new section 17(3)(a) which is found in clause 3 of the proposed Bill, we already provide for the ability to regulate not just the packaging, but also the size of the actual tobacco product or cigarette itself.
Mr Gan Thiam Poh has asked if MOH would consider restricting nicotine and other harmful substances in tobacco products. This is again not quite the emphasis of the Bill here but I would like to inform the House that under the Act currently, there are already limits set for tar and nicotine in cigarettes. We note that the US Food and Drug Administration is studying the possibility to lower the nicotine content of cigarettes to non-addictive levels. MOH will monitor these developments closely. There will be public health benefit if cigarettes can be made to be non-addictive but, of course quitting smoking would be much easier.
Mr Gan asked if MOH would consider requiring broadcast media to carry reminders of the harmful effect of tobacco in all screenings of videos, movies or drama productions, where the scenes of smoking cannot be edited and cut.
There are presently already content guidelines for media broadcasters to exercise due diligence in the depiction of smoking on TV, in movies and other media channels. But as Prof Lim did point out, today, the media is more than just traditional TV or videos or movies. There is also social media on the Internet.
With that in mind, we look at the different suite of measures and work out what is best to address and arrest these images. In broad terms, broadcasters must avoid conveying the impression in programmes that smoking is socially acceptable, glamourous or harmless. However, portrayal of smoking in films continues to be a problem worldwide, and cannot at present be completely eradicated. However, we will study the suggestion to display anti-smoking messages or advertisements before any films containing tobacco imagery are shown.
Mr Louis Ng also asked if we could consider restrictions on certain brand variant names. We will give it consideration, but as Mr Ng knows, we prescribe the way in which the name of the brand as well as the variant is presented in terms of style and font and colour on the package. We will look at the names to ensure that they are not misleading, which is already the current requirement.
Mr Speaker, in conclusion, tobacco use is still a significant public health problem in Singapore. Smoking rates in recent years have not shown a clear pattern of continuous decline, and more than 2,000 Singaporeans die prematurely from smoking-related diseases each year. I thank the Members who have spoken today in support of this Bill, and I also note the concerns that have been raised.
The decision to introduce the SP Proposal, that is, to introduce standardised packaging of tobacco products and to enlarge our existing graphic health warning size, was not taken lightly. We have given very careful, due and deliberate consideration to the available primary evidence, consulted with experts in different fields, and different types of experts and sought the public’s views multiple times. We acknowledge the impact that the introduction of the SP Proposal will have on tobacco and its related industries, potentially in terms of costs and other ways as highlighted by various Members including Er Dr Lee and we have taken and will continue to take steps to mitigate this impact.
Ultimately, the SP Proposal is expected to serve positive objectives and provide substantial public health benefits, including leading to reduced smoking prevalence in Singapore. These objectives and outcomes warrant its introduction in Singapore as an additional measure in our comprehensive, multi-pronged, multi-faceted tobacco control strategy. I hope I have sufficiently addressed Members’ concerns, and am grateful for the support that has been shown for the SP Proposal received from members from the public and also from this House. With that, I beg to move.
: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Minister for Health, I beg to move, "That the Bill be now read a Second time."
The Traditional Chinese Medicine Practitioners Act, referred to as "the Act" in this speech, was enacted in 2000 to safeguard patients' interests and safety, raise professional standards and regulate the professional ethics and conduct of registered TCM practitioners (TCMPs). Under the Act, the Traditional Chinese Medicine Practitioners Board, or referred to as "the Board", was established to register practitioners engaging in prescribed practices of TCM in Singapore, accredit TCM courses for the purpose of registration as well as the Singapore institutions of higher learning offering such courses; regulate the professional conduct and ethics of registered practitioners, and make recommendations on the continuing training and education of registered practitioners.
Since then, MOH and the Board have progressively put in place programmes and frameworks to raise the professional standards of TCMPs in Singapore. In 2013, MOH set up a $3 million TCM Research Grant to encourage collaborative research between researchers in public healthcare institutions, the TCM sector and institutions of higher learning, with the objective of better informing effective TCM practices. A total of $2.6 million has since been awarded to 11 proposals shortlisted from three grant calls. In view of the encouraging response, a further $5 million has been added to the Grant in 2017. Last year, a $5 million TCM Development Grant was also established to support skills development and capability building of the sector. Individual TCMPs are eligible to apply for the Development Grant, capped at $200 per year, to defray the cost of attending TCM classes. Accredited TCM training providers may also seek funding support to conduct local TCM conferences and seminars. As we strengthen professionalism within the TCM sector, MOH has reviewed the Act to ensure that the Act remains relevant and responsive towards the changing practice environment.
The TCMP (Amendment) Bill before us today proposes amendments to the Act to better protect patients' interests and safety, improve the timeliness and fairness of the disciplinary framework for registered TCMPs, and help raise professional standards.
Speaker, allow me now to highlight the major provisions of the Bill.
Continuing professional learning is important to ensure that TCMPs keep themselves current in their professional practice. Continuing professional education has already been implemented for other healthcare professions, such as doctors, nurses and pharmacists.
MOH and the Board introduced voluntary Continuing Professional Education (CPE) in 2013 to enhance the standards and safety of TCM practice. Under the voluntary CPE programme, all registered TCMPs are encouraged to accumulate at least 25 CPE points per year. Clause 5 of the Bill amends section 17 of the Act to provide that the Board may refuse to grant or renew a Practicing Certificate (PC) if the TCMP fails to comply with the prescribed CPE requirements. The target is for all registered TCMPs to accumulate at least 50 CPE points within a two-year period in order to renew their PCs. The requirement as defined would allow some flexibility for individuals to plan their learning without unduly affecting their professional practice.
We developed this CPE points assessment framework after engaging with the TCM community extensively on CPE since 2013, taking note of their concerns on the availability and the range of CPE courses offered and reasonableness of the costs of these courses. We appreciate the constructive feedback and have taken them into consideration, such as expanding the accredited course offerings to include new modes of learning to suit the different needs of TCMPs.
Currently, all complaints against registered TCMPs are investigated by Investigation Committees appointed by the Board. While these cover a wide range of matters, the disciplinary framework does not adequately deal with allegations that a registered TCMP is unfit to practise due to his physical or mental condition. These cases do require a different approach since a health inquiry into the TCMP's fitness to practice is required as opposed to an investigation into an incident or transaction. The current framework also does not enable stoppage orders to be made in extreme situations where a TCMP must be made to immediately stop practising because of serious and imminent risk to the public if there is no stoppage, or if stoppage is required to avoid any actual incident that endangers the public.
Clause 11 of the Bill introduces the new Part IVA of the Act, which sets out the revised disciplinary framework for TCMPs, which I will elaborate next in detail. First, the new section 26A allows a registered TCMP to voluntarily curtail his practice if he believes that: (a) his fitness to practise is impaired by his physical or mental condition; or (b) the quality of the professional services he provides does not meet the standard which is reasonable to expect of a registered TCMP to carry out.
The Board, with the agreement of the registered TCMP, may cancel the practitioner’s registration, suspend the registration for up to three years or impose appropriate conditions on the registration. A disciplinary inquiry does not need to be conducted in order for the Board to accede to the practitioner’s request. However, this avenue will not be available in cases where there is evidence of professional misconduct or there is a pending disciplinary inquiry against the practitioner.
The process in the new section 26A is initiated by the TCMP himself or herself, which encourages practitioners to come forward if they are of the view that they are unable to continue practising at the standard expected of a registered TCMP. This improves the timeliness of the process and allows the Board to resolve appropriate cases expeditiously.
Second, the new Part IVA sets out in the body of the amended Act a revised framework for inquiries into disciplinary matters concerning a registered TCMP. The processes have been streamlined to speed things up and to fit the introduction of a health inquiry. A person may make a complaint against, or provide information about, any registered TCMP to the Board touching on any of the grounds set out in section 19(1). The complaint or information will be reviewed by the Board upon receipt, and for purposes of its review, the Board may require the complainant or TCMP concerned to answer any inquiry or provide any record that the Board considers relevant. The Board may dismiss any complaint or information that is frivolous, vexatious, misconceived or lacking in substance.
However, if the case is not dismissed on any of those grounds, the Board must refer the complaint to an Inquiry Committee.
The Inquiry Committee will have six months to carry out its inquiry from the date of the referral of a complaint to the Committee, unless the Chairman of the Board grants an extension of time. The Inquiry Committee must direct one or more investigators to investigate the facts and circumstances of the complaint. The investigator must give the TCMP concerned written notice of the complaint against him, and the TCMP can provide a written explanation to the investigator. The TCMP also will have the opportunity to appear before the Inquiry Committee, whether in person or represented by counsel, to be heard on the complaint.
Upon completion of its inquiry, the Inquiry Committee will submit a report of its findings to the Board, together with its recommendations on the disciplinary action to be taken under section 19 of the Act against the TCMP. After considering the Inquiry Committee's report, the Board may take such action under section 19 as it thinks fit, or dismiss the case. In appropriate cases, the Board may also refer the complaint back to the Inquiry Committee once more for the Inquiry Committee’s reconsideration or a further report on such matters as the Board may specify.
Third, the new section 26H enables the Board to make an interim order that requires a TCMP to immediately stop his practice for a period not exceeding 18 months. No prior inquiry or investigation is needed before making such an interim order.
But the Board may do so only if there are reasonable grounds to believe that, either there is a serious and imminent risk to the public if there is no such stoppage, or if it is to avoid any actual incident that endangers the public.
If the Board is satisfied that it continues to be necessary to prevent the TCMP from practising, the Board may confirm the interim order, with or without modifications. Before the interim order is confirmed, the Board must refer the interim order to an Inquiry Committee. The TCMP may make representations or objections against the proposed confirmation to the Inquiry Committee. The Inquiry Committee will then consider the facts of the case before making a recommendation to the Board whether or not to confirm the interim order.
The next group of amendments concerns the disciplinary penalties that may be imposed on a registered TCMP who has been found guilty following a disciplinary inquiry under the new Part IVA.
Currently, the Board may cancel the registration of an errant TCMP if he has been found guilty of professional misconduct or negligence, or any of the other grounds of misconduct under section 19 of the Act. Alternatively, the Board may caution or censure the TCMP, impose a financial penalty of up to $10,000, add, delete or replace conditions on his registration for a period not exceeding three years, or suspend his registration for up to three years.
To provide sufficient deterrence and punishment for misconduct so as to protect the safety and interests of the public, clause 7 of the Bill amends section 19 of the Act to increase the maximum financial penalty that can be imposed from $10,000 to $50,000, where the TCMP is found guilty on any ground in section 19(1)(e) to (k) of the Act. The increase will bring about better alignment with the other healthcare professional Acts and provide greater assurance and confidence to the public that errant TCMPs will be dealt with appropriately as against other healthcare practitioners.
Clause 7(d) introduces further disciplinary penalties that the Board may impose on the TCMP. These include the Board ordering the errant TCM practitioner to give an undertaking, on such terms as the Board thinks fit, to abstain from the conduct that was the subject of the disciplinary inquiry. The Board may also refer the matter for mediation between the TCM practitioner and the complainant. Examples of cases that may be suited for mediation include cases arising from poor service provided to patients and miscommunication.
Taking clauses 7(h) and 9 of the Bill together, sections 19(5) and 21 provide that the Board's decisions on disciplinary matters does not take effect until the thirty-first day after the date of the decision. This is to allow the TCMP sufficient time to consider whether to file an appeal to the High Court against the Board's decision. Similar provisions are found in the Medical Registration Act and the Pharmacists Registration Act. Where there is an appeal to the High Court, the decision of the Board takes effect only when the High Court confirms the decision or dismisses the appeal, or the appeal is withdrawn.
However, this is subject to the new section 19(5A), under which the Board's decision to cancel the registration of the TCMP takes immediate effect if the Board certifies that there are grounds to believe that either there is a serious and imminent risk to the public if the cancellation does not take immediate effect, or it is appropriate or requisite that the cancellation takes immediate effect to avoid any actual incident that endangers the public.
Clause 12 of the Bill repeals and re-enacts sections 28 to 30 of
the Act to enhance the enforcement powers of investigators investigating into disciplinary matters concerning registered TCMPs, as well as offences under the Act such as unlawful practice of TCM by unregistered persons.
Currently, for the purpose of investigating into offences under the Act, authorised officers may enter and inspect any premises which are used or suspected to be used to carry out any prescribed practice of TCM, and inquire into the conditions under which the practice is carried out. However, the officers are unable to search the premises or seize evidence without a warrant, which hinders the timely and effective conduct of investigations.
Under the new section 29, investigators appointed to investigate into offences under the Act or its subsidiary legislation may, without first obtaining a court warrant, enter and search a place which is used or suspected to be used to carry out any prescribed practice of TCM, or to keep any document, record or thing used in connection with carrying out of the TCM practice, and to seize evidence for the purpose of investigating an offence under the Act. However, if the investigator is investigating into a disciplinary complaint under the new Part IVA, these powers of entry, search and seizure can be exercised only if: (a) a court warrant has been obtained; (b) the occupier of the place consents; or (c) the investigator believes on reasonable grounds that there is an imminent or immediate danger of serious bodily injury or death to any individual who is receiving or who is about to receive any treatment at the place.
The new section 30 makes it an offence for a person to: (a) provide any document or give information that is false or misleading in a material particular; (b) knowingly obstruct or prevent an investigator in the discharge of the investigator's powers or duties; (c) intentionally alter, suppress or destroy any document or information which the person is required to provide; or (d) fail, without reasonable excuse, to provide any information the person is required to provide.
Finally, the new section 30A provides for the disposal and forfeiture of items seized by an investigator under the amended Act.
Next, I will turn to the other amendments in the Bill, which are mostly of a housekeeping nature.
Taking in feedback from the TCM community, clause 3 of the Bill amends section 3(2) of the Act to increase the maximum size of the Board from nine to 11 members, which allows for a broader representation of the TCM profession on the Board.
Clause 6 repeals and re-enacts section 18 so that the Registrar of the Board is not constrained to publishing a list containing information about all registered TCMPs
with a valid
practising certificate in the Gazette. Instead, the amendment will allow the list to be published on the Board's website or by other means.
Clause 8 amends section 20 to clarify the types of costs and expenses that the Board may require a TCMP who is the subject of disciplinary proceedings under Part IVA to pay. This includes the cost and expenses of any assessor or advocate and solicitor appointed by the Board for any proceedings before an Inquiry Committee, and reasonable expenses the Board may pay to witnesses.
Clause 14 inserts a new section 34A to provide that the Board may compound any offence under the Act that is prescribed as a compoundable offence. The maximum composition sum is the lower of one half of the amount of the maximum fine that is prescribed for the offence, and $2,000. This empowers the Board to compound such offences without having to rely on section 243 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, please allow me to conclude in Mandarin.
The upholding of practice standards of TCM practitioners is important as the TCM profession matures and develops in Singapore. Therefore, MOH values and encourages the continuing education of TCM practitioners.
We have successfully introduced voluntary CPE in 2013 and received positive feedback. After the passage of this Bill, it will, indeed, be a milestone for the TCM community as we implement compulsory CPE. We are grateful for the feedback from the community on the implementation of CPE and have also taken in their feedback, such as expanding the learning platforms to include accredited online courses, and to award more points for instructors and self-learners.
To support TCMPs in their continual learning, TCM practitioners can tap on the TCM Development Grant, capped at $200 per year, as well as the SkillsFuture Funding, to defray their costs for attending CPE courses.
Besides CPE, MOH also hopes to enhance the regulatory regime by amending the Bill, to further strengthen the disciplinary framework for greater efficiency and to maintain public and patient safety more effectively.
With this, I seek Members' support for this Bill. Mr Deputy Speaker, I beg to move.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, Traditional Chinese Medicine, or TCM, forms an integral and important part of our healthcare landscape. In recent years, both our Prime Minister and our Minister for Health have remarked on the critical role that TCM can play in improving the health of our citizens, particularly within the context of an ageing population. And I too would like to put on record my appreciation to the TCM community for the contributions to Singapore's healthcare. And certainly, TCM remains a medical remedy of choice for many Singaporeans, and indeed we are seeing a new generation of TCM practitioners, with more young Singaporeans choosing TCM as a career, particularly since the introduction of NTU's double degree programme in Biomedical Science and Chinese Medicine in 2005.
The amendments to this Act, which was first passed in 2000, are timely and vital for the TCM sector to grow and achieve its true potential in providing for the healthcare needs of Singapore. I have three comments and clarifications for the Minister.
First, the clarifications to the disciplinary framework are welcome and will certainly improve self-regulation within the TCM sector and increase public trust. Nonetheless, I am concerned that the lack of a more formal disciplinary or inquiry process, and the absence of specific schedules on penalties, and clear definitions of physical and mental fitness for work, may lead to the same issues and criticisms facing disciplinary processes by the Singapore Medical Council today.
For instance, how robust will the renamed Inquiry Committee's decision regarding a practitioner's physical or mental fitness to practise be? This is a challenge that western medicine is also facing. For instance, in the United States, there was a much discussed case or incident where a senior surgeon in his early 70s while supervising a procedure fell asleep during the surgery. This particular surgeon was not performing the surgery itself but concerns were raised. And there were many discussions between the Board of the hospital and various communities but the problem they faced was that it was difficult to prove fitness or unfitness from a mental or physical point of view. Just by going by normal physical and mental tests alone, he passed. The case was finally resolved by the voluntary withdrawal of the physician in question from clinical practice. But these are challenges that have no easy answers. And I would like just to find out, with this Inquiry Committee, how will it deal with such cases?
For other feedback, if there is a complaint to the Complaints Review Committee, for instance, about over-charging, how will such cases be investigated given that there are no generally agreed guidelines and the spectrum of treatments within TCM is very wide? I have heard instances where the cost of TCM treatment could even reach six figures and maybe five figures in many cases. What would be considered an acceptable treatment modality and what would not be considered an acceptable treatment modality, considering that TCM embraces a wide range of treatment philosophies and modalities, some of which may be at odds with one another?
I hope that the Ministry will be able to elaborate on how the procedural aspects of these disciplinary processes can be made more robust and better able to stand up to scrutiny, with these amendments.
Second, the introduction of compulsory continuing professional education is certainly a step in the right direction and will help to maintain professional standards. I would like to ask how the Ministry will assist in ensuring the quality of accredited courses or programmes, and also to ensure that enough of such educational activities are available and also are accessible to practitioners.
There are now over 3,000 TCM practitioners in Singapore, but I note that close to 20% of them are inactive. If these inactive practitioners do not participate in the CPE programme and do not practise, will this affect them if they decide to re-enter active practice in the future and reapply for a practising certificate or licence?
Third, I note also that the maximum number of members of the TCM Board will increase from nine to 11, under the proposed amendments. I would like to ask if the Ministry would consider also increasing the minimum number of members from five to seven, and also mandating a higher minimum number of medical practitioners and, in particular, TCM practitioners to the Board. This would allow for a greater breadth of professional medical opinion in the Board. Thank you, and I support the Bill.
: Sir, the Bill before us aims to regulate and professionalise further the practice of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) in Singapore. It does so through tightening existing disciplinary processes and implementing new mandatory Continuing Education requirements.
The enhancement of professional standards that this Bill aims to bring about is welcomed.
Sir, as TCM practice grows more regulated and professional, I urge the Ministry not to spare complementary efforts to integrate TCM into our healthcare system, to the fullest extent warranted by existing evidence of efficacy and also safety. Since 2013, the Ministry has provided $8 million in funding for collaborative research projects between researchers and practitioners of TCM and those in our Universities and hospitals. As these projects and also research and trials undertaken elsewhere in the world lead to increased adoption of TCM in our healthcare, I hope complementary changes can then also be considered with a view to making the benefits of regulated and professional TCM more easily available to Singaporeans, such as the provision of subsidies for TCM treatment under the Community Health Assist Scheme (CHAS) or under the Pioneer Generation Scheme (PG), the increased scope for payment in MediSave funds for TCM items, or the recognition of medical certificates (MCs) issued by TCM practitioners.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, today's Bill aims to strengthen the regulatory framework for TCM practice in Singapore, and to enhance the professional standards of TCM practitioners through mandatory continuing education requirements, so that local TCM practitioners and acupuncturists can "keep up with the times". I welcome this move.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, we know that TCM and western medicine differ in origin, nature, professional training and industry structure. It follows that effective regulatory regimes would not be the same for both. However, western medicine constitutes the mainstream of modern medicine and healthcare, and has relatively comprehensive professional training and regulatory frameworks worthy of learning from.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, support for TCM in Singapore is premised on its scientific modernisation and integration with modern medical technology. I hope we can lengthen our stride and quicken our pace in this direction, the better to make our contributions in bringing more benefits of TCM to the world.
I hope that TCM remedies which have proven to be effective and safe following thorough clinical experimentation can be integrated into our healthcare system without delay, for the benefit of more patients. At such point, the Government may adopt complementary measures so that TCM may be more widely available to all. Such as the increased scope for payment in Medisave funds for TCM items, the provision of subsidies for TCM treatment under the Community Health Assist Scheme (CHAS) or Pioneer Generation Scheme (PG), or the recognition of medical certificates (MCs) issued by TCM practitioners.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, I stand in support of this Bill. The TCM Industry has boomed of late. This could be due to the increased demand for alternative therapies, an enhanced awareness for such therapies and also the fact that there is now more interest and research into this area. When we speak of TCM, it can conjure different images in different persons: ranging from the neighbourhood sinseh shops with herbal smells, to the very established companies such as Eu Yang Sang International Ltd.
During a recent survey by MOH it was noted there are about 10,000 Singaporeans who visit and seek TCM treatment every day. Not a small number at all.
There are always certain code of conduct, etiquette and practice guidelines which will be ascribed to every body of professionals. The same must apply to TCM practitioners, who are also involved in caring for the public and patients and thus must be assessed with accountability as well.
A few points to bring up. Firstly, the Bill, first enacted in 2000, with a view to raising standards and the conduct of practice in the TCM sector is now being reviewed. Since then have there been any cases which required disciplinary action or suspension? If so, what are the common reasons or root causes? I ask about this with an intent to see if we can address some of these in this latest Bill that we are discussing today.
Secondly, I support the formation of the Inquiry Committee when the need arises, versus having a permanent one in place for a certain term because it is more relevant to appoint according to the type of cases, breaches or issues that we are handling at a certain point in time. This way we can appoint the appropriate type of TCM personnel or even specialists to provide opinion and consultation or serve as an expert witness.
Thirdly, pertaining to the compulsory Continuing Professional Education (CPE), I firmly support this. I also have a few suggestions to make.
One, to have the setup of a directory electronically for courses and training being offered for easy access and knowledge of all TCM practitioners. The usual organisers can come together to discuss and brainstorm this and see how best to execute but for those who want to offer ad hoc courses and training, there should be a body of persons looking into the suitability of these courses to ensure certain standards are met.
There must be a secretariat to also monitor and carry out surveillance to track the number of points and warn practitioners of the shortfall if they risk not getting renewal of their practising certificates.
There were some concerns on the cost to be borne by the practitioners themselves for these courses. In the Medical and Nursing profession, for example, established institutions have got a sponsorship scheme and other forms of support for their practitioners. Now, for large TCM groups this may be feasible to offer but for the lone TCM practitioner, there may need to be other considerations given or offer of subsidies or, perhaps, even accredit scheme. This will be for the Ministry to review and consider. Of course, some courses can be offered online though e-learning will also take time and money to set up.
Some offset can take place by offering some of these courses through SkillsFuture or other upgrading grants but that is something to be reviewed with caution. In this context, can the Ministry also update us on the use of the TCM Development Grant. What can this Grant be utilised for? Is it just for education or improvement of practice and setup?
I note also the number of points for CPE required over two years. Can I ask if there will be some flexibility given to the TCM practitioners, especially for the first two years as the running in period? This request is with the consideration that some of our TCM practitioners are in the older generation and they are in solo practice and they may need time to adjust to this, to get used to the new guidelines as well.
Next, can I get some clarification on the term "TCM practitioner" as used in this Bill? Are the people who run the sinseh shops, prescribing herbal type medications in this category as well? How about those who offer massage and tuina services as practitioners as well as the dispensers in the neighbourhood shops? Are they also incorporated into this Bill under consideration?
On the 11 members of the Board, can I suggest also that they represent TCM practitioners who are generalists and also some who are specialists in certain aspects of the practice. But I also note that we may need to have the relevant and adequate numbers of specialists in TCM area for now so, therefore, this is something, perhaps, to be considered later on.
With TCM services the fees, we note can range from as low as $1 to $2 in the neighbourhood and community clinics to the highly priced ones in advanced centres. What is the Ministry’s view on this and will we be moving towards some range standardisation, perhaps, even into different categories of services which are being offered?
And, finally, on the issue of Medical Certificates by TCM practitioners and their recognition by employers, this is a long-drawn issue that has been debated for very often. Are we planning to come up with some standardisation or guidelines? This has always been a controversial issue and I think it will continue to be because of the range of services as well as TCM practitioners that are out there. So, perhaps, some comment from the Ministry on this. All in all, I support the Bill.
: Sir, I stand in support of this Bill. In recent years, Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) has become more popular as a career of choice. From 2012 to 2017, the number of practitioners rose by 16%.
However, as the profession swells in ranks, it must keep up its standards. Despite the growth in numbers, degree holders still comprise only 21% of all registered practitioners, according to 2017 data. Some 5.7% of practitioners have no formal qualifications at all.
Practitioners must continue to learn, unlearn, and relearn to keep up with the times. This Bill mandates continuing professional education for practitioners. At the same time, it clarifies and elaborates the mechanisms used to keep practitioners in check.
I agree with these measures, and I thank MOH for holding a public consultation and incorporating views from that consultation into this piece of legislation.
I have five points of clarification to raise.
My first point is about fines.
The Bill raises the maximum fine from $10,000 to $50,000. I agree in principle with the increase, as it strengthens deterrence and punishment in an area where human lives are concerned. However, it is unclear to me why this penalty is less than that imposed on Western medical practitioners. Under the Medical Registration Act, medical practitioners face a maximum penalty of $100,000. In effect, we are saying that Western physicians get fined $100,000 for doing wrong, while TCM physicians get fined $50,000 for doing wrong.
In its response to the public consultation, the Ministry said that that Medical Registration Act more seriously penalises Western physicians for one reason only: that they pose "greater risk of potential harm to patients".
Can the Minister explain how a Western physician might be more dangerous than a TCM practitioner?
Last September, the TCM Practitioners Board fined a physician the maximum $10,000 for recommending that a patient delay her cancer treatment or surgery. The physician conveyed a whole slew of dangerous advice to his patient. He told her that the tumor would grow slowly. He told her that surgery would make the cancer cells proliferate more quickly. He told her that her tumor was not life-threatening.
In addition, he prescribed capsules of ginseng and herb that, at best, provided a false sense of comfort for his patient. We were lucky that the patient’s daughter interceded and that the patient went ahead, promptly, with surgery. But not every patient is so lucky.
I am concerned about the message that this difference in fines sends. When patients sit in a physician’s office, the physician is the figure of authority. TCM physicians are in a prime position to influence the health decisions of patients. In this case, the physician took the patient down a dangerous, life-threatening course of action.
I urge the Ministry to further explain why a TCM practitioner should face a less severe penalty than a Western medical practitioner. My second point is about continuing professional education. I am heartened that the Bill empowers the TCM practitioners board to reject the registration of practitioners who fail to comply with requirements on mandatory professional education.
My question is whether the Board can issue such requirements as part of a punishment imposed on errant practitioners.
In the case I previously mentioned, the Board issued only a fine and a suspension to the practitioner even though it found that he was, "neither remorseful for his conduct nor fully aware of the danger that he posed to that patient."
From that statement, it appears the practitioner did not agree or understand that what he did was wrong. What, then, is stopping him from making similar mistakes of the same nature when he returns to practice? What course of action has been taken to ensure his knowledge base is updated to what the profession demands?
In many industries, it is common for errant professionals to undergo some programme of training or education to rectify their gap in knowledge and understanding. Can the Ministry clarify whether the TCM Practitioners Act equips the Board with powers to require offending practitioners to undergo specific courses of professional training?
My third point is about responding to complainants. The new section 26E details an array of timelines. Upon receiving a complaint, the Board has two weeks to start a review and three months to complete that review. If they refer the matter to an Inquiry Committee, the committee has six months. All in all, it seems that the process can take just under a year, extensions notwithstanding. It is a long time for a complainant to wait.
My questions are as follows: does the Board have an obligation to respond to the complainant with the results of its review? If the review proceeds to the stage where an Inquiry Committee is convened to investigate, must the complainant be notified about the final findings? In either case, is there a requirement that the Board relays information in any prompt manner to the complainant?
It is laudable that we have an extensive framework for investigating complaints. Surely, the point of these investigations is not only to be accountable but also to demonstrate accountability. It then seems important to me that the Board has a duty to reply to the complainant in a reasonably prompt fashion with a response that meaningfully addresses the complainant's concerns.
My fourth point is about sharing the results of investigations with former patients.
If TCM physicians have conducted themselves in a dangerous way, it is possible that they have done it before. For instance, a physician who has given incorrect advice about how to deal with cancer might well have said similar things to other cancer patients.
The TCM Practitioners Act does not appear to mandate that the Board release investigation results to former patients of the errant physician.
Historically, we have seen some cases of misconduct by TCM practitioners reported in the news media. However, it is perhaps not a stretch to say that many TCM patients may not follow the news media closely. Thus they may not be aware that the diagnosis or treatment they received was shoddy. Could the Ministry share whether, and how, it communicates with former patients when physicians are found guilty of misconduct?
My fifth and last point relates to mental and physical condition. Section 6 of the Act bars a person from membership of the board if "he is incapacitated by a mental or physical disability." Section 19 contains a similar phrase. The section allows the Board to cancel the registration of a practitioner if he "is unable to carry out the prescribed practice of TCM for which he is registered safely or effectively by reason of a mental or physical disability." In this Bill, the phrase "disability" is amended to “condition."
I have two questions relating to this point. One, why does one use "disability" while the other use "condition"? Does the Ministry mean to make a meaningful distinction between the two usages? Two, could the Ministry articulate what would constitute a mental or physical condition, or a mental or physical disability? More specifically, what would be a condition or disability that results in incapacity or inability to carry out safe and effective practice? Is a certifying doctor, Western or TCM, required to weigh in? Who is the final adjudicator on this matter of judgment?
Clarifications on this point, I believe, will provide guidance in future when there is any such dispute.
Sir, in conclusion, the Bill is a step in the right direction. It reflects meaningful input solicited through the Ministry's public consultation, and it provides a robust framework with which to regulate a profession that helps manage the health of many Singaporeans. Sir, notwithstanding my clarifications, I stand in support of this Bill.
: Deputy Speaker, I welcome as it will help to raise the standard of professionalism in this sector and increase public confidence in TCM. Many of our elderly across different ethnic groups have been relying on TCM or a combination of TCM and western medical treatments. TCM has made significant contributions to public healthcare in our multi-racial society. It is also gaining recognition and popularity in the west.
The introduction of compulsory Continuing Professional Education (CPE) hours per year will bring TCM professionals in line with the existing practices for our mainstream medical practitioners. I am convinced that it is also beneficial for the TCM practitioners to be kept updated about the new findings, best practices and latest technologies. These will enable them to make better and more accurate diagnosis and care for their patients better.
I certainly support measures to enhance the Ministry's investigative powers and increase the penalties for errant TCM practitioners. Such a move is necessary for the protection of patients and will also increase the confidence of patients in TCM professionals. The reputation and image of the TCM sector will also be lifted by enhanced professionalism and higher standards as a result. For instances where there had been complaints about negligence or misconduct not directly related to the treatment aspects, will there be an avenue for mediation?
Next, I would like to ask the Minister how many complaints have been received so far each year for the past 10 years and whether the rate of such complaints had fallen after the introduction of the registration and certification of TCM. In addition, what efforts have been made to accord the accreditation to "Tie Da" physicians?
I would also like to know how many patients have used TCM services each year for the past 10 years. Will MOH also look into the integration of patient records nationally for better assessment and management of patients by both mainstream and TCM medical practitioners?
Deputy Speaker, Sir, MOH is working together with top TCM organisations to provide continual training for TCM practitioners, which will benefit both the practitioners and the patients. TCM practitioners will be able to learn the most up-to-date, advanced professional knowledge and medical treatment. By doing so, Singapore can become another world-class regional medical hub.
: Senior Minister of State Amy Khor.
: I thank Members for speaking in support of the Bill. Prof Fatimah Lateef, Mr Gan Thiam Poh, Dr Chia Shi-Lu and Mr Louis Ng highlighted the increasing popularity of TCM and the growing number of registered TCMPs in Singapore, and hence the need for a robust regulatory and disciplinary framework and a code of conduct, etiquette and practice guidelines for TCMPs to provide greater assurance and confidence to the public.
Members have also expressed support for the implementation of compulsory CPE to raise the standards of the profession.
Let me now respond to the queries and suggestions made by Members in respect of this Bill.
Prof Fatimah asked if subsidies could be offered to TCMPs to defray the costs of attending CPE courses. As mentioned in my opening speech, individual TCMPs can already apply for the TCM Development Grant launched last year capped at $200 per year to help defray the cost of attending CPE courses.
I am pleased to share that as at the end of last year, over 400 individual TCMPs have benefited from the Grant, with claims of more than $71,000 made. This is in addition to the $90,000 granted to accredited TCM training providers for the organisation of TCM conferences and seminars. We will continue to monitor the utilisation of this Grant by individual TCMPs to defray the cost of attending CPE courses and make adjustments if necessary.
As Prof Fatimah Lateef rightly pointed out, TCMPs can also make claims under the SkillsFuture Funding for their courses. We will continue to encourage CPE course providers to get their courses accredited by SkillsFuture Singapore so that more TCMPs can benefit.
Prof Fatimah Lateef also asked whether there could be some flexibility given to the TCMPs during the first two years of implementation of compulsory CPE. Let me first explain that we introduced voluntary CPE some five years ago and have also undertaken extensive consultations with the industry on the implementation of compulsory CPE. Hence, the TCMPs should be familiar with the CPE framework and guidelines on points accumulation.
Nonetheless, the accumulation of compulsory CPE points will take effect from 2020 after the Bill has been passed. For new registered TCMPs, they will be issued Practising Certificates (PCs) valid until June 2020 and will be required to accumulate 50 CPE points in order to renew their PCs in June 2022. So, they start accumulating points after June 2020 and then in June 2022, they will be required to have the requisite 50 CPE points for the PC renewal.
Of the 2,800 existing TCMPs holding valid PCs, half of them will have their PCs expiring in June this year and the other half in June next year. For those with PCs expiring in June this year, their PCs will be renewed until June 2020. This exercise is to align the existing cohort so that the CPE requirement can start at the same time for all existing TCMPs. Between now till June 2020, the Board will engage the TCMPs and CPE course providers to update them on the revised CPE assessment framework. We strongly urge all TCMPs to actively participate in CPE and familiarise themselves with the online CPE system.
Dr Chia asked how TCMPs who are not currently in active practice will be impacted with the passing of this Bill. As the CPE requirement is uniformly applied to all TCMPs who wish to practice, those who do not currently hold a valid PC will have to fulfil the CPE points requirement before they can apply to resume their practice.
Dr Chia also asked how MOH will ensure the availability and quality of accredited CPE courses upon the implementation of compulsory CPE. On the availability of CPE courses, the Board has been engaging the course providers to organise more courses in anticipation of the implementation of compulsory CPE. To further ensure that there are adequate courses, the CPE course providers will be required to fulfil a minimum number of course-hours per year to maintain their accreditation status.
The Board has established guidelines for the accreditation of CPE providers and courses, such as the credentials of the speakers or instructors, to ensure that they are of acceptable standard.
Prof Fatimah Lateef may be pleased to note that with the online CPE system, TCMPs may log on via the Board's website to search for CPE activities they wish to attend and monitor their CPE points. The system will be enhanced to send reminders at appropriate junctures to TCMPs who are at risk of not satisfying their CPE points requirement to help them fulfil these requirements.
We note Mr Gan's suggestion to integrate records of patients receiving treatment from both mainstream and TCM service providers for more coordinated management of care. However, as TCM is complementary to mainstream treatment and there are clinical and technical challenges that make it difficult to integrate the records, we will continue to work with the TCM community in order to provide a holistic approach towards patient management through other avenues.
For example, the TCM Development Grant supports the TCM service providers to strengthen their operating capabilities including the adoption of IT solutions and enhancement of clinic facilities for TCM clinics.
Prof Fatimah Lateef and Mr Gan Thiam Poh asked for information on the number of complaints received, disciplinary action taken and the trend over the years. The number of complaints received by the Board each year since 2013 has remained relatively constant at less than 10 per year, with about half of these cases requiring disciplinary action against the TCMPs involved.
The cases can be broadly categorised into professional misconduct, negligence, use of western medicines and criminal conviction. The actions the Board can take against a TCMP is dependent on the gravity of the matter the TCMP is guilty of and range from issuing a letter of advice, censure, or the suspension or cancellation of registration.
While the number of cases is relatively low, we need to continue to ensure that the disciplinary framework remains relevant and effective in safeguarding public interest and safety. This will be effected through the proposed three-pronged approach mentioned in my opening speech, namely to enhance the disciplinary framework to improve efficiency, increase maximum financial penalty to provide sufficient deterrence and enhance investigative powers.
The proposed increase in maximum financial penalty from $10,000 to $50,000 is to provide sufficient deterrence and punishment for misconduct so as to protect the safety and interests of the public. This quantum is similar to the maximum financial penalty applicable for dentists, pharmacists, and allied health professionals in the Dental Registration Act, Pharmacists Registration Act and Allied Health Professions Act but lower than the maximum penalty of $100,000 for doctors under the Medical Registration Act (MRA).
We have on balance decided on the $50,000 maximum quantum as TCMPs provide direct outpatient care to patients, similar to the allied health professionals and dentists in general.
To Mr Louis Ng's query on whether the Board informs the complainant of the findings of the inquiry and if it communicates with former patients of the TCMP if the TCMP is found guilty of misconduct, the Board will promptly inform both the complainant and TCMP involved of the Board's findings and decisions in writing once the inquiry process has been completed. Furthermore, upon the conclusion of the case, a press release will typically be issued and published on the Board's website for public access.
I thank Dr Chia for his comments on having clear guidelines for the penalties to be meted out by the Board. The Board has put in place a sentencing framework based on the degree of harm and culpability to assess the seriousness of the offence and to guide the appropriate sentencing.
As deemed necessary, the Board will update the framework.
In addition, the Board also engages the Academy of Chinese Medicine Singapore for expert advice on TCM professional matters.
Prof Fatimah and Dr Chia Shi-Lu commented on the representation of the Board. We agree that the Board should consist of experienced and well-versed TCMPs who are conversant with various aspects of TCM practice. Hence, the current composition of the Board requires Board members who are TCMPs to have at least 10 years' experience in the practice of TCM.
Taking into account feedback from the public consultation, the size of the Board will be increased from nine to 11 so that more TCMPs can be included on the Board. We think this would suffice as since its inception, the Board has comprised the maximum number of members allowed under the Act.
Mr Louis Ng sought clarifications on the differences in the use of term "mental or physical disability" in section 6 of the Act which sets out the criteria for disqualification of Board members and "mental or physical condition" in section 19 of the amended Act, which allows the Board to take certain action against the TCMP concerned.
The amendment Bill revises the language in section 19(1)(k) from the term "disability" to "condition" so as to broaden the scope of mental and physical conditions that may render a TCMP unable to practice TCM safely. This will better safeguard patients' interests as the TCMPs are directly responsible for the care of their patients. On the other hand, we recognise that a person may still be able to contribute effectively as a member of the Board even if he was afflicted by a mental or physical condition, like a mild stroke, that does not affect his daily activities and mental capacity. However, this same condition may affect a practicing TCMP's ability to provide safe and effective care.
The Inquiry Committee for conducting a health inquiry relating to a TCMP's fitness to practice should consist of members who have the relevant expertise to inquire into the matter of which it is appointed, for example a member who is a medical practitioner in a relevant field.
Mr Chen Show Mao may also like to note that MOH regularly reviews the regulations and policies on TCM, taking into consideration the advancements in medical science and evolving standards of TCM. For example, based on latest literature on safety of use, MOH has lifted the ban of raw herbs containing berberine (黄连), to allow practitioners more options in the use of TCM in their practice and service to the public. Since 2005, acupuncture has also been allowed in our public hospitals.
We are also happy to note that the research project, supported by the TCM Research Grant, on dry eyes undertaken by the Singapore Eye Research Institute and Singapore Chung Hwa Medical Institution, has shown encouraging results. We hope that this will foster greater research collaborations between Western Medicine and TCM.
Prof Fatimah Lateef asked about the possible standardisation of charges for TCM services and recognition of Medical Certificates (MCs) issued by TCMPs. As TCM plays a complementary role to mainstream medicine in Singapore's healthcare system, MOH will leave it to the employers and companies to decide if they wish to recognise the MCs issued by TCMPs.
Prof Fatimah Lateef also pointed out that there is a range of charges for TCM services. This is due to a correspondingly diverse range of TCM practices and services offered, from charity TCM clinics operated by Voluntary Welfare Organisations to large industry players with chain clinics, catering to all segments of the population. Hence, the charges will continue to be left to market forces.
In response to Prof Fatimah Lateef's request for clarification on the classes of registration, we would like to note that there are currently two classes of registration – practitioners registered as TCM Physicians are able to provide the full range of TCM practice, including acupuncture, while practitioners registered as acupuncturists can only practice acupuncture. To Mr Gan Thiam Poh's query on the accreditation of "Tie Da" (跌打) practitioners, "Tie Da" is considered a form of traditional folk medicine passed down from master to apprentice and hence, Tie Da practitioners are not registered under the Act.
There is also no requirement for the registration of Chinese herbal dispensers, although herbal dispensers with the relevant qualifications can choose to be listed with the Board. There has been a decline in the use of Chinese herb which are mainly available from Chinese medical halls, compared to the use of Chinese Proprietary Medicines that is Chinese medicines in the prepared form, due to the latter's convenience and ease of use.
Notwithstanding this, MOH supports the continuing education of herbal dispensers as part of the upskilling of the TCM industry. Herbal dispensers listed with the Board are also eligible for funding support provided under the Development Grant.
MOH will continue to support and promote the professionalism of TCM practitioners, and ensure consistency and safety of TCM use.
Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, a robust and efficient disciplinary framework and the upholding of practice standards are important for the safeguard of public safety as the TCM profession matures in Singapore.
We are indeed heartened by the support of the TCM community and the public during our consultation and engagement sessions, as well as the support of Members of this House. Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move.
: Mr Deputy Speaker, Sir, I beg to move, "That Parliament do now adjourn."
: Mr Deputy Speaker, it has been a difficult few weeks for the Singapore Armed Forces (SAF). The death of CFC(NS) Aloysius Pang and other servicemen before him has provoked one of the most wide-ranging public debates about National Service in recent memory. As suggested in the title to this Adjournment Motion, I will speak on three distinct but interlinked themes – training safety, operational readiness and the will to fight, before concluding on some areas that MINDEF should consider to improve the safety architecture in the SAF.
First, training safety. Members would know that the women and men in uniform in the SAF perform tasks that are inherently risky. They operate heavy machinery and weapons in difficult conditions. The work demands that they can function at the physical, psychological and emotional limits of human endurance during both training and operations. The ability to perform under pressure during training can help bolster effectiveness during operations. Hence the time-honoured military saying for soldiers in training, "The more you sweat in peace, the less you bleed in war". However, the risky nature of such work demands, particularly for a predominantly conscript army, that extra care and attention be devoted to safety and the management of risks during training.
Human lives are at stake when unnecessarily risky and unauthorised training is carried out in the SAF. Injury and death of personnel during training decrease the operational effectiveness of our military. To the extent that women and men in uniform and the public do not believe that the SAF manages such risk to acceptable levels, there will be negative consequences for morale, performance and the institution of National Service. Therefore, training safety must always be of the utmost importance for MINDEF.
However, MINDEF's recent message to make and I quote, "zero-training deaths the norm" is not only unrealistic but also wishful, considering the inherent risks in training a military force that must be ready to defend the country at a moment's notice or whenever called upon to do so. As a result of the expectations created, every time a training fatality occurs, the public pressure on MINDEF and SAF commanders down the leadership chain takes on a very corrosive edge. This damages not just the SAF, but the institution of National Service too.
In the aftermath of CFC(NS) Pang's passing, MINDEF's narrative has shifted somewhat to, I quote, "a zero-accident mindset". NSmen and those who are familiar with the SAF understand what MINDEF wants to achieve when it speaks of striving for zero fatalities – that MINDEF takes safety seriously.
But the word the public the focuses on is "zero", and the end-state of zero accidents or fatalities is a goal that cannot be achieved even in industries with notoriously strict safety standards and compliance requirements like aviation. For example, in October 2015, maintenance engineers did not follow established procedures to insert landing gear pins before troubleshooting a landing gear fault causing a Singapore Airlines A330's nose-wheel to collapse at the boarding gate resulting in multi-million dollars' worth of damage. It was not a minor miracle no fatalities ensued as passengers waited to board the aircraft and a technician stood just metres in front the plane.
Mr Deputy Speaker, no organisation let alone one that is in the business of war and defending Singapore’s sovereignty can realistically promise zero fatalities or training incidents even as the public must insist on the strictest training safety parameters for the SAF, and MINDEF strives for the same.
Second, operational readiness. Like other organisations with a requirement to be operationally ready at a moment’s notice, military personnel must be able to complete their assigned tasks safely and effectively. But, more so than any other type of organisation, militaries like the SAF must also stress discipline and hierarchy. This enables the organisation and its members to become a lethal fighting force that can call upon a whole suite of weapons to kill the enemy and those that seek to do Singapore harm.
To reach such a level of proficiency, training has to be tough and realistic. But tough and realistic training must strike a balance between discipline, hierarchy, risk management and safety, so as to prepare the SAF to be operationally ready for different and difficult circumstances. As much as I support the safety review currently being undertaken by the SAF, it must not lead to a public perception that the SAF has gone soft. While requirements, expectations and the training methodology must adjust to each generation of NSmen and the equipment they operate, the SAF must be mindful not to swing to an extreme where realistic training is compromised.
In this regard, the public response to the death of CFC(NS) Pang has been far from one-way, dominated by doubts cast over MINDEF and the necessity of National Service. It has also prompted a significant counter-perspective – one that is shared by many NSmen, including amongst those who are currently fulfilling or have completed their NS requirements and commitments. They asked: in spite of the training incidents that occur from time to time, can Singaporeans envision a safe and secure Singapore without operationally-ready NSmen and an operationally-ready SAF?
On the latter point, the recent bilateral spat between Singapore and Malaysia was raised as an example of the possibilities that could be imposed upon Singapore if not for the strong SAF that any potential adversary has to contend with. Many online commentators focused on the Mahathir factor as a reason why the sharp deterrent edge of the SAF represents a central pillar for our existence as a sovereign nation. However, the need for a strong SAF is not personality-specific or for a particular moment in time. It is in fact, far more fundamental.
The key determinant that necessitates a strong SAF is founded in our geopolitical realities. We are a small country of under six million surrounded by much larger neighbours in ASEAN where our two closest neighbours in particular are represented by about 300 million people combined. Putting race, religion and other fault lines aside, we live in a world where larger countries are wont to lord over the small and powerless, throwing laws and legal norms out the window particularly when there is no real price to pay for doing so. Combine this with Singapore’s peculiar circumstances – chief of which is that we are geographically very small – the need for a capable and resolute SAF becomes abundantly clear, regardless who our neighbours are.
In such a context, Singapore’s need for a strong operationally-ready deterrent force that means business and can promise and deliver a bloody nose on any adversary becomes not just acute, but critical. The public must never forget that the institution of National Service which underpins a strong SAF stands at the delivery end of that promise.
Finally, the will to fight. Mr Deputy Speaker the will to fight is an important concept that unites SAF personnel and NSmen, regardless of rank. It embodies our sense of national identity, why we regard Singapore as home and why we will be steadfast and resolute in defending the country. Building up the will to fight in a country which is not ethnically homogenous, generally affluent and where immigration is an important Government policy, is no mean feat and always challenging. It requires constant attention and reflection. As a result of the recent incidents, some of the discussions in the aftermath of CFC(NS) Pang's passing have the potential of damaging the institution of National Service unless MINDEF steps in to decisively address broader misgivings that are simmering in the minds of some Singaporeans.
Other well-meaning Singaporeans have also asked fundamental questions about National Service. One of the more well-reasoned ones has sought to question why MINDEF cannot evolve to employ an all-regular force. These questions and other similar ones do come up from time to time and it would be important for the MINDEF to establish why such an outcome is or is not realistic.
Some years ago, on the back of a Committee of Supply cut, I proposed that MINDEF publish a detailed defence white paper outlining the strategic imperatives of the SAF. Amongst many useful purposes, such a document could serve as an important reference for all segments of the public, including our neighbouring countries, to appreciate and understand why Singapore needs a strong and world-class military that is able to defend the sovereignty of the country.
Mr Deputy Speaker, doubts about the necessity of National Service weakens not just the very institution but our collective will to fight. More insidiously, the ubiquity and ever-present nature of the online media is such that an adversary can weaken our will to fight without even firing a single shot in anger by identifying the pressure points in our society’s psyche. Undermining public confidence in our citizen army is a ripe and ready strategy an adversary will employ to fulfil its national aims. Should the public lose its confidence in the SAF and support for National Service is undermined, the force over-match that our military currently enjoys will be rendered irrelevant in the face of a divided public. While Singaporeans should never shy away from sharing their views and opinions on matters of public interest even if they are not mainstream, we should not lose our sense of perspective and proportion. In spite of earlier surveys highlighted in this House about the public's support for National Service, the recent spate of training deaths reminds us how the status quo can be shaken very quickly.
To that end, the Minister’s earlier reply to my Parliamentary Question on how the current safety review in the aftermath of CFC(NS) Pang's unfortunate passing is different from earlier ones is to be welcomed.
Nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out the likelihood that there could be a number of shortcomings in the SAF training system that disrupt the balance between safety and operational readiness. Specific areas should be looked into from a fresh perspective.
One approach MINDEF should consider is stretching the retirement ages of the officer and WOSE corps. Compared to many militaries around the world, there is an argument to be made that our officers, in particular, are made to retire a little too prematurely with many valuable years of experience potentially lost to make more long-lasting and valuable contributions to the organisation. The importance of deep experience for our regular commanders in foreseeing the risks of high-intensity training, mitigating for them and being better prepared to deal with unprecedented mishaps was perhaps put best by Chesley Sullenberger, the captain of the US Airways flight that landed in the Hudson River on 15 January 2009 after a catastrophic bird strike that destroyed both of plane's engines putting 155 lives at risk. Instead of returning his stricken plane the airport, Sullenberger made a decision to ditch the aircraft in the river, a decision that was later extensively scrutinised but proven to be ultimately sound. He said and I quote, "For 42 years, I've been making small, regular deposits in this bank of experience, education and training. And on January 15, the balance was sufficient so that I could make a very large withdrawal."
Mr Deputy Speaker, extending the time our senior commanders remain in their command appointments so that they are able to acquire deeper operational knowledge would have positive spin-offs in anticipating and preventing training incidents. In this regard, the SAF should also pay particular emphasis on retaining officers and WOSEs after they retire. It should consider individuals who have previously left active service to take up competitive and well-paying appointments as members of the safety inspectorate or other safety related outfits in the SAF.
A second area of consideration for MINDEF deals with the point that in the run-up to 2030, the cohort of 18-year olds enlisted for National Service is going to get smaller. With less manpower to execute MINDEF’s mission, machines are likely to become more important with soldiers and troops transiting to more lethal motorised and mechanised platforms with even unmanned platforms becoming a weapon of choice. Such a shift would require a soldier to be familiar with not just soldiering fundamentals but require a mastery of the new weapons and machines under his or her charge. The type of accidents that can occur may also change with risks of electrocution becoming more real than collisions and similar mishaps. This development inevitably points towards more time required for training, live-firing and maintenance-related duties. NSmen may also need more time to re-familiarise themselves with their equipment during ICT and before exercises with more oversight from safety coordinators and training facilitators – something the NS training system would have to accommodate. To this end, the SAF may have to throttle back on non-core, non-training related duties, and even national ones to focus more squarely on its core mission.
A final area of review must include a change in tone and culture towards safety and this must begin at the very top. From a legislative perspective, a qualitative way to facilitate this must include a review of the Government's position on section 14 of the Government Proceedings Act. The argument that removing the right of a soldier to sue MINDEF would weaken the SAF or cause commanders to hesitate to push their troops must be broadly reconsidered against armies which have removed similar laws.
The UK for example has done so, and their military is not just involved in peacetime training, but significant combat operations. To drive home the centrality of safety for the SAF's peacetime mission, there is room for the Government to inject greater accountability into its protocols and processes by creating a specific carve-out for wilful disregard of safety factors under section 14 of the Government Proceedings Act. Such an exception would cease to extend immunity to MINDEF or to a negligent commander in the event of an egregious breach of safety.
My colleague Dennis Tan had raised this proposal in 2016 following the tragic death of PTE Dominique Sarron Lee. Minister responded by suggesting that the removal of immunity may compromise training and prejudice commanders who, for example push their soldiers to complete IPPT or strive for higher performance.
To address such legitimate concerns, a possible exception to Section 14 on the grounds of training safety would only apply if a commander behaves recklessly, maliciously or displays a wilful disregard for safety considerations. For example, if a commander had deliberately chosen to cancel a safety briefing, disregarded training safety regulations, had not catered for sufficient rest before or between training and missions without adequate reason or risk mitigation approved beforehand by a more senior commander, then the blanket immunity provided under section 14 should not apply. It would follow that a court of law should be left to determine whether MINDEF or the commander in question must be held liable.
In many ways, Mr Deputy Speaker, such a legislative change would represent an important bellwether for the evolution of training safety management in the SAF more than 50 years after the introduction of National Service. But the significance of this proposal to tweak section 14 of the Government Proceedings Act does not lie in the fact that MINDEF or and any irresponsible commander can be sued. Paradoxically in fact, such a change – legislatively determined – would serve to protect the institution of National Service by making it more accountable instead of undermining it. It would buttress public confidence in the importance of National Service, why safety is critical, and the lengths MINDEF and any Government of the day would go to protect the institution, even if it means putting MINDEF's own reputation and that of its commanders on the line. In doing so, MINDEF would send a clear and unambiguous message – which the buck stops at the top.
To conclude, Mr Deputy Speaker, whenever any soldier falls, we all feel a collective pain, for a life that holds so much hope and promise. We also share in the loss of their family members who live with the grief and regret of losing a son or daughter in peacetime and in service of the nation. But the question in the wake of the training deaths experienced by the SAF over the last 17 months and the years before that, is whether this House can assure mothers, fathers, husbands, wives and loved ones that SAF personnel will be safe when they enlist for National Service, when they are called up for ICT or when they serve the SAF. The answer must be an unequivocal yes.
As a core value of the SAF, there should be no doubt that the SAF takes this safety seriously precisely because we are a largely conscripted force. There are potential safety gaps that need to be considered and improvements which need to be made. I hope that these can be swiftly and thoughtfully instituted with the professionalism the SAF is known for, so that Singaporeans can rest easy knowing our military women and men are operationally-ready to keep Singapore safe and secure at all times. Thank you.
: Minister for Defence.
: Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. Let me thank Mr Pritam Singh for his comments in the Adjournment Motion. As Adjournment Motions go, you reflect on them and you cannot answer every point in the 10 minutes that you are allocated. I am sure that if the House wants us to debate the various points that he has brought up, I think we can find other fora to do so.
But let me start from where we agree, and it is very gratifying. We agree that National Service is crucial. We agree that without the NS and without the SAF, we cannot defend ourselves; that after 52 years, we are in a much better position of being able to defend our sovereignty and that we have come a long way.
We also agree that we want to make training for national Servicemen as safe as possible. And as Mr Singh himself says, assure every mother, assure every parent, that their son will go back to them safe in the two years of NSF and in-camp trainings.
How to achieve this? There may be some disagreement or differences. Mr Singh says "don't aim for zero fatalities" – that is a goal too high. You set too high expectations. And he is right in a way. But which mother shall we say can lose your son?
I came to that view that we should aim for zero fatalities from the experiences of our own commanders. And I share with you a very good speech by previous Chief of Defence Force (CDF) Bey Soon Khiang, because when it comes to running an operation, you have to listen to your commanders, you have to see what they can do.
So, this was a speech that Lieutenant-General (Retired) Bey Soon Khiang who was RSAF's Chief of Air Force (CAF) and then CDF gave at a safety symposium last year. I quote from him, "So you take a look at the RSAF's mishap data in our early years, the picture is a sombre one. For the first 20 years from 1970 to 1990, we lost in terms of fighter numbers, almost the same number as our entire F-16 fleet today. For comparison, the RSAF has operated the F-16 C/Ds for more than 20 years now from about 1996/1997, and we have lost two. And the last loss occurred more than 10 years ago."
That is a stark difference. Just pause to think. For the first 20 years, we lost in terms of fighter numbers, almost the same number as our entire F-16 fleet today. He went on to say, "Most significantly to me as a commander, such accidents also sapped the morale of the people unnecessarily. Each time we attended the funerals of fellow pilots and servicemen, seeing the grief of their loved ones was an emotional trauma. As a commander trying to explain to the family of the lost pilot why it happened, why they are going to continue with life without a husband or a son, grow up without a father, was most difficult. As Chief of Air Force then, I felt that I had failed to take care of my men. To me, they reported to work every day to train for war and I had failed in my duty to ensure that they trained safely so that they could return to their loved ones every day. So this, he says, "was how Zero Accidents started."
"I started asking myself questions", he continues, "back to the basics. I asked myself: have we lost sight of the overall mission to deter? Each accident erodes deterrence. If we cannot be safe, how does it reflect on our capability? If our own Singaporeans have low confidence in the RSAF", and in this case, RSN or even the Army, "how can we even be a deterrent? If the RSAF is critical in the defence of Singapore, which lacks strategic depth, the situation is surely unacceptable, for before we started fighting the war, we had already lost 50 fighters. So, our peacetime exchange ratio must look quite bad. At the individual level, the whole idea of training in peacetime is to deter and when deterrence fails, be there on the first wave. But you will not be there if you kill yourself during training. Then, the training is in vain."
Zero fatality is a very difficult target, and as Mr Pritam Singh said, may be impossible. But we have to aim for it. And as our own experience shows, in some years, we will be able to achieve it. Can anyone guarantee that there will be zero fatalities for the rest of our future? Surely not. But that zero fatality goal sears into the consciousness of every commander and every soldier that to get there, you better be careful about what you are doing, that safety lapses will not be tolerated, that it will be safety first, because, at the end of the day, I want to train you and want you to be alive to be able to fight when Singapore needs you.
Mr Singh says, "Well, you can get the same outcome. Just allow the people to sue the Government including MINDEF." That is a very tangential argument and misses the point. There is accountability for commanders who make a mistake. I do not need for those who want to sue the Government to do so before the commanders are held accountable. I have told you many times, and we have taken commanders or national servicemen who had been derelict, who had not done their duty, to criminal prosecution, not just civilian payouts in the courts. They go to jail. Their lives in that sense and careers are ruined; and justly so, if they deserve it.
So, let us get back to basics. Mr Singh says, "Oh, don't be afraid of MINDEF's reputation." I am not afraid of MINDEF's reputation. I am more concerned about individual lives, about how our commanders, at any given moment of time, watch for the safety of their national servicemen, of their people under their charge, and yet, at the same time, conduct realistic training.
I think this is the right way to go. I think there will be no easy shortcuts. I think we will need everyone to pitch in and I am grateful at least that all Members of this House believe that National Service is an imperative, is a critical need and that we must improve our safety standards so that we can uphold National Service and national defence. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.
Adjourned accordingly at 6.07 pm.
asked the Minister for Environment and Water Resources & Minister-in-charge of Muslim Affairs in view of the recent restriction order meted out to a former religious teacher recognised under the Asatizah Recognition Scheme (a) how is MUIS reviewing the Scheme; and (b) whether there will be newer domains for consideration, provisional periods of observation and compulsory face-to-face interviews before final approval of applications under the Scheme.
: The Asatizah Recognition Scheme, or ARS, requires all Muslim religious teachers, or asatizah, to abide by a Code of Ethics. This includes not encouraging extremism or violence, denigrating other racial and religious groups, committing ethical misconduct and promoting segregationist practices. The Asatizah Recognition Board, or ARB, oversees the ARS, supported by the Islamic Religious Council of Singapore, or MUIS. The ARB consists of senior and respected asatizah in the community.
In her PQ, the Member refers to the case of Mr Murad Mohd Said, who was placed on a Restriction Order in December 2018. Murad's ARS-recognition was cancelled in May 2018, after Murad contravened the ARS Code of Ethics. This is how the ARS system should work. It monitors and takes action to bar those whose views are inimical to social cohesion from preaching.
I wish to assure the Member that the ARB and MUIS take ARS registration seriously. Processes have been put in place to ensure that our asatizah registered with the ARS can perform the role that the community entrusts them to do. These processes include, as the Member has suggested, instituting provisional periods of observation and requiring additional interviews when deemed necessary by the ARB.
All ARS-asatizah are also required to go for regular training, and their suitability are periodically reviewed. If there are reports or if they demonstrate that they are unfit to be asatizah, such as breaching the Code of Ethics, their ARS status will be cancelled.
Both MUIS and the ARB conduct regular reviews of the ARS system. The ARS is meant to build up and support our asatizah community, so that they are reliable and credible sources of religious knowledge for the Muslim community, and play an important role in fostering peace and harmony.
asked the Minister for Trade and Industry what is the Ministry's assessment of the vulnerability of Singapore companies with significant investments in China as China witnesses its weakest GDP growth in 28 years.
: Over the years, many Singapore companies have invested in China to ride on its growth. Singapore companies have invested across a diverse range of sectors, from manufacturing to real estate, wholesale and retail trade, to financial and insurance services. The easing of China’s economic growth has been a gradual one, and companies would have carefully made their business calculations and projections accordingly.
In our conversations with companies, there is recognition that China's economy is maturing. This includes shifting from an export-led and investment-oriented growth model towards one that is driven by domestic consumption. From rapid growth of 10.6% in 2010, growth has eased in the intervening years to 6.6% in 2018, and the IMF has projected China's 2019 GDP growth to be 6.2% as investment growth moderates and some domestic deleveraging continues. There are also uncertainties in the outlook arising from unresolved United States-China trade tensions, but the Chinese government has made clear its preparedness to bolster domestic demand.
Amidst the headwinds facing the Chinese economy, there remain opportunities as China continues to liberalise and pursue its provincial-regional strategies such as the integrated development of mega-regions like the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area and Yangtze River Delta. Provinces and municipalities like Guangdong, Jiangsu and Shanghai have maintained growth rates on par with or above China's national average last year.
1
To support Singapore companies’ investments in China, Singapore has established a network of provincial business councils in Guangdong, Jiangsu, Liaoning, Tianjin, Shandong, Sichuan and Zhejiang over the years. With the China-Singapore Free Trade Agreement (CSFTA) upgrade to be ratified later this year, Singapore companies can also look forward to improved market access in goods and services.
More Chinese companies are also venturing out of China and has chosen Singapore as a launchpad to internationalise their businesses. As of end-2017, China's stock of direct investments in Singapore reached SGD 36.3 billion. This is an increase of around 10% per year on average since 2010.
2
There is thus scope for Singapore and Chinese companies to forge closer partnerships and leverage on each other’s networks to tap on opportunities in the region.
asked the Minister for Trade and Industry whether the Ministry will consider legislation to prevent professional scalpers from profiteering by reselling overpriced tickets of concerts and sports events to genuine consumers.
: Generally, there is no prohibition against the resale of goods and services, including concerts and sports events tickets, subject to the terms and conditions of the original seller. The margin which resellers can command is freely determined between willing buyers and sellers. This means that the resale price can end up being higher or lower than the original price.
Government should not prescribe profit margins for ticket resales. We encourage consumers to take steps to protect themselves before making their purchases. Consumers who are purchasing tickets of concerts and sports events can, for example, check the terms and conditions of such tickets carefully before making their purchases, and compare the resale price with the original price of the tickets. If consumers are unsure about the legitimacy of the tickets they are about to buy, they should approach the official event organisers for verification to avoid paying for a ticket which may be subsequently voided by event organisers.
If consumers have reason to believe that suppliers have engaged in unfair trading practices in the sale of tickets, for example, false and misleading claims, they can approach the Consumers Association of Singapore (CASE) with details of these practices for CASE to assist them in seeking redress from the suppliers. The Competition and Consumer Commission is also empowered with investigation and enforcement powers under the Consumer Protection (Fair Trading) Act to take action against errant suppliers who persist in unfair trading practices. The Police can also investigate if there is fraudulent activity involved in the sale of tickets.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) whether the Thomson-East Coast MRT Line will be operational ahead of schedule; and (b) whether an extension can be made for the Line to connect to Pasir Ris and Punggol to provide additional conveniences and connectivity to residents from the north east.
: The Thomson-East Coast Line (TEL) is scheduled to open in stages, starting from December this year. We expect to fully open TEL by 2024. Constructing a rail line is a complex operation. The implementation timelines are carefully planned to ensure safety is not compromised. It is unlikely that we can expedite the opening of the TEL further.
There is no plan to extend the TEL to Pasir Ris and Punggol. However, LTA is studying the feasibility of extending the proposed Cross Island Line (CRL) to serve these areas. Engineering studies for the Pasir Ris – Punggol stretch of the CRL are ongoing.
asked the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth (a) whether the Ministry will consider providing more support to athletes who are about to retire from sports as the transition out of high performance sports is difficult in many ways; and (b) what more can be done for these athletes, both mentally and professionally, to ease their transition from their careers as sportsmen to the workforce.
: We support our athletes on their journey of high performance sport, extending beyond their competitive stage in life into their retirement from competitive sports. To do so effectively, the Government partners other stakeholders in the sports eco-system. The Singapore Sport Institute (SSI) works with corporate partners under the spexBusiness Network to offer professional development opportunities, such as internships, apprenticeships, part-time and permanent positions with flexible work arrangements, as well as mentorship and advice on starting a business, to prepare our athletes for a post-sports career. The Network also organises career-readiness workshops and networking opportunities with corporate partners. Athletes who need career advice and support on other well-being issues can also approach SSI, which oversees athlete life management matters.
Many corporates have stepped forward to support our athletes, and we hope to see more doing so. The spexBusiness Network currently comprises 60 companies across more than 25 industries to provide a wide array of career opportunities to our Team Singapore athletes. Since 2013, 230 former and current Team Singapore athletes have benefitted from the spexBusiness, including (i) former shuttler Derek Wong who took on a full-time position at Deloitte, (iii) former sprinter Calvin Kang who started a sports-related business, and (iii) para-swimmer Sophie Soon who is now on a flexi-work arrangement with Toyota Asia, following her internship at Sport Singapore.
Some of our National Sports Associations (NSA) have also instituted programmes of their own, such as the Singapore Table Tennis Association (STTA) which has bursaries and arrangements with Institutes of Higher Learning (IHL) to support their athletes to transition to a post-sport career. I would like to encourage more NSAs to support their athletes in this regard.
The Government's sustained investment in sports over the past years has led to a more developed and vibrant local sports ecosystem. This has in turn provided more prospects for retired athletes to pursue a career in sports that they are passionate about. Many former national athletes have successfully made the transition to coaching, including in our ActiveSG sports academies, and they continue to contribute to the development of a Sporting Singapore by mentoring the next generation of athletes.
asked the Minister for Education (a) what is the current ratio of allied educators (AEDs) to students in each school; (b) what are the types of training and resources made accessible to these AEDs; (c) in 2018, how many students required the help of an AED and how were these students identified; and (d) whether the Ministry has plans to increase the number of AEDs in our schools.
: The number of Allied Educators (AEDs) is currently about 2,000. Our AED force includes School Counsellors (SCs), Student Welfare Officers (SWOs), AEDs for Learning and Behavioural Support [AEDs(LBS)], and AEDs in Teaching and Learning [AEDs(T&L)] in mainstream schools.
On average, each school has a team of one SC, and one to two AEDs(LBS). Some schools have an additional SWO to support students with irregular attendance. AEDs have been a great help in supporting socio-emotional, counselling, and special educational needs (SEN) of our students. In terms of training and resources, all our SCs are trained in the Diploma in School Counselling or Masters in Counselling, and all our AEDs(LBS) undergo the Diploma in Special Education training.
Students with social and emotional issues may approach the SCs for help on their own, or are referred by their parents, teachers, or peers who have observed signs of distress or other concerns. Schools target the support provided by AEDs(LBS) to students with SEN based on the level of needs. Last year, SCs and AEDs(LBS) had attended to about 67,000 students, or about 15% of our student population, for a range of needs.
MOE will continue to recruit and train AEDs to meet students' needs. But the aggregate number of AEDs is less important than focusing our AED resources on areas where students need the most support. Hence MOE has consciously grown specific groups of AEDs to provide stronger specialised support, while scaling back on the number of AEDs(T&L) to reshape our workforce to deliver optimal educational outcomes for our students. In fact, a number of AEDs(T&L) have been selected to be retrained as AEDs(LBS) by taking up the Diploma in Special Education.
Over the last five years, we have grown the number of AEDs(LBS) by over 40%. In recent years, we had also increased the number of SCs, and introduced more SWOs to provide greater support for students who struggle with attendance issues. MOE intends to announce a more detailed plan in the near future on how we will better support the students in our schools who need the most help.
asked the Minister for Education (a) whether there are standard operating procedures or guidelines for teaching staff in dealing with situations involving parents of children who are divorced or are undergoing divorce; (b) whether there are specific guidelines for situations where there are disagreements or disputes between parents in respect of the arrangements for the child in school; and (c) whether there is training for the teaching staff to guide them to handle such situations.
50
asked the Minister for Education whether there are guidelines for teaching staff to handle problems arising from the Parents Gateway mobile app being accessible by both parents, such as disputes between parents relating to the arrangements for their child.
: It is difficult for schools and teachers to get deeply involved in family matters. Hence, schools will generally work on the basis that both parents are entitled to receive information in respect of a student; that any decision conveyed by one parent reflects the views held by both parents; and any school information sent home with the student or given to one parent at school, would be communicated to both parents.
If schools find out that a student's parents are undergoing divorce or have already divorced, their key consideration will be the child’s well-being and best interests. Disagreements or disputes between parents can impact their child's emotional state and, thus, his or her ability to learn in school. Therefore, schools will usually encourage parents to set aside their personal differences and work towards a compromise or consensus. Where schools are made aware of any court orders made in respect of a student, such orders will be taken into account in subsequent engagements with the respective parents.
Parents Gateway is a mobile application that was officially launched at the start of this year as part of MOE's on-going efforts to support our schools in their communication and engagement efforts with parents on their children's educational journey. Its design is also consistent with the approach I had stated earlier.
I am not sure that a set of rigid rules or protocols is the best way forward because every child from a broken family is surrounded by unique circumstances, and oftentimes educators will find themselves caught between parents, grandparents and other relatives. Educators will have to exercise judgement and manage each case sensibly and carefully. By abiding to the approach I mentioned, and with experience and support from their fraternity, educators will become better at handling these issues with time.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs (a) what is the percentage of Singapore Prison officers re-employed at retirement; (b) what is the average length of re-employment; (c) whether there are adjustments to wages and benefits for the re-employed officers; and (d) how can trained prison officers be re-deployed at retirement to manage lock-up or remand duties within the other Home Team agencies.
: In the last five years, about 20% of retired Prison Officers were re-employed. Their re-employment contracts range from one to three years, which may be renewed depending on organisational needs.
For those officers whom Prisons is unable to re-employ because of headcount constraints, Prisons helps them look for suitable job opportunities. The Home Team Career Transition Office also organises regular career advisory sessions for officers to network with potential employers. Officers are provided with time-off and subsidies to attend training to enhance their employability, and to participate in employer attachment programmes. Through these efforts, some Prison officers have successfully secured second careers within and outside the Home Team, such as the Industrial and Services Cooperative Society, halfway houses and in the healthcare and social service sectors.
Currently, officers re-employed under the Home Affairs Uniformed Scheme (HUS) get a three percent pay cut to their last drawn salary.
We have recently reviewed this guideline. From 1 April 2019, officers will be paid the last drawn salary if they are re-employed in the same level job in the HUS scheme.
On the other hand, if a HUS officer is re-employed in a civilian role or deployed to a smaller job, the salary will have to be adjusted accordingly.
All re-employed officers are eligible for wage components such as performance bonus and annual increment, as well as benefits such as vacation leave, medical care and training. These terms are consistent with the re-employment guidelines for the Public Service.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs (a) what is the number of stateless residents living in Singapore as of January 2019; (b) out of this group of residents, how many are stateless permanent residents; and (c) what is the Government's roadmap to help this shrinking group of residents to attain their citizenship.
: As at 31 December 2018, there were 1,303 stateless persons living in Singapore. 80% of them are Permanent Residents (PRs).
Some of these stateless persons came from other countries to live and work in Singapore, and lost their foreign citizenship over time. Others were born in Singapore but were not eligible for Singapore Citizenship (SC) at birth as their parents were not Singapore Citizens and did not obtain citizenship for their children from their home country.
Stateless persons can acquire SC on the same basis as other applicants. They will need to meet the relevant requirements, such as economic contribution, education qualification, family profile and length of stay in Singapore.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs (a) what is the total number of complaints received in the past three years regarding the use of images without authorisation or permission on social media platforms like Instagram, Facebook and Snapchat; and (b) whether there are any plans to enact laws to regulate such use when images are misappropriated and used to offend or insult the modesty of a woman in light of the emergence of accounts like SgJCBabes.
: The unauthorised use of images per se is not a criminal offence. Police do not track the number of such cases.
However, depending on the contents of the images and how they are used, the person may be committing an offence of insulting the modesty of a woman under section 509 of the Penal Code.
Even where no Penal Code offence has been uncovered, if the images cause the victim harassment, alarm or distress, the victim can apply for a Protection Order under the Protection from Harassment Act for the images to be taken down. The victim can also lodge a Magistrate's Complaint to seek redress or compensation.
asked the Minister for Manpower whether the Government can incentivise and support employers to encourage their employees to take part in meaningful exercises every day for the long-term health benefit of employees.
: There are existing initiatives to support employers in getting their employees to adopt healthier and more active lifestyles.
The Workplace Safety and Health Council (WSHC) works with the Health Promotion Board (HPB) to promote the Total Workplace Safety and Health approach. Under Total WSH, safety and health initiatives are integrated at the workplace. The WSHC and HPB provide incentives to employers to conduct health screenings, help workers to manage health conditions, promote ergonomic techniques for lifting loads, and institute workplace exercise programmes.
Examples of programmes that support workplace exercise are HPB's SME Health+ and Workplace Alliance for Health schemes. They provide co-funding of up to 70% for SMEs and up to 50% for non-SMEs, for workplace exercise programmes conducted by HPB's pre-approved providers. HPB's National Steps Challenge, which encourages participants to accumulate at least 10,000 steps a day and 150 minutes of physical activity per week, also features a corporate component.
We will continue to regularly review our initiatives to support employers in encouraging their employees to adopt healthier and more active lifestyles.
asked the Minister for Manpower (a) what is the female workforce participation rate over the past three years; (b) what percentage of the female workforce are freelancers; (c) what are the key challenges faced by women who wish to seek employment or who prefer freelance work; and (d) what are the Ministry's plans to raise the female workforce participation rate.
: Our female labour force participation rate for ages 15 and over has moved up in the last ten years, from 56% in 2008 to 60% in 2018. In the past three years, it has remained steady at around 60%. When compared to the OECD countries, we rank well – having improved from 17th to 9th place in the decade.
About 6% of our female residents in employment are self-employed
1
. Like most self-employed persons in Singapore, the majority or about 70% of the regularly self-employed women took on their jobs as their preferred choice and primary form of work.
The challenges that women face in seeking employment are similar to what men also face, such as the lack of necessary work experience, qualifications and skills. To help more women join and stay in the workforce, the Adapt & Grow initiative offers services like job matching, training subsidies and salary support to address skills, wage or expectations mismatch. We encourage jobseekers to visit WSG's Careers Connect or NTUC's Employment and Employability Institute (e2i)’s career centres for assistance. They can also use MyCareersFuture portal to find jobs best suited to their skills.
Compared to males, a larger proportion of women looking for jobs cited the lack of flexible work arrangements (FWAs) as a challenge. This is likely because women still tend to take on more care-giving roles. It is our key priority to support women in their family and career aspirations. MOM introduced the Tripartite Standard on FWAs to encourage more employers to offer FWAs. MOM also provides funding support, through the Work-Life Grant, of up to $105,000 per company for the sustained adoption of FWAs.
Like their male counterparts, self-employed females may be subject to payment disputes and loss of income in the event of prolonged illness or injury. Since March last year, self-employed persons are able to seek help from the voluntary mediation services provided under the Tripartite Alliance for Dispute Management (TADM). This is part of the recent Tripartite Workgroup's recommendations which also encourage the adoption of the Tripartite Standard on Contracting with self-employed persons that can minimise such disputes. We have also made available prolonged medical leave insurance products for the self-employed to enhance their health protection.
MOM is committed to helping our women return or stay in the workforce and will continue to work with our tripartite partners to achieve this aim.
asked the Minister for Education whether the Ministry will consider drawing up a list of SkillsFuture courses for seniors whereby they can attend with one younger family member to help them in their learning journeys.
: There is a wide range of affordable courses designed specifically for seniors, including IT courses at various levels of proficiencies, and learning opportunities under the National Silver Academy (NSA) offered by community-based organisations and Institutes of Higher Learning.
Many of these courses are delivered by experienced adult educators who can cater to the learning needs of seniors. Selected NSA courses are offered in various vernacular languages, and we are prepared to run more of such courses if there is demand.
NSA courses also include inter-generational learning programmes that pair students with senior learners, to teach seniors various topics such as IT, social media, e-payment, accessing government digital services, staying safe online and photography.
Family members who wish to accompany their seniors are welcome – either as a pairing partner in place of the students, or to attend the courses as fellow course participants. For seniors who have specific learning needs that require further assistance, family members may approach training providers to discuss the most appropriate form of learning support, including being accompanied by a family member when necessary.
asked the Minister for Education whether the Ministry will consider increasing Government funding for Special Education (SPED) schools in order to expand the means test criteria for the scheme so as to help families cope with the educational expenses of raising children with special needs.
: Government funds Special Education (SPED) schools at significantly higher levels than the mainstream schools, so that they can meet the different and unique learning needs of their students. MOE also reviews funding for our SPED schools regularly with NCSS, taking into account manpower costs and the requirements of different special educational needs.
Over the last few years, overall government funding for SPED schools have increased steadily, as funding per student is raised and more students are diagnosed with Special Educational Needs (SEN). Today, Government subsidises a substantial proportion of the cost of educating a student with SEN.
Notwithstanding, the cost burden to lower income Singaporeans with children with SEN is still significant. To support them, we have a SPED Financial Assistance Scheme, which covers school fees, textbooks, uniforms and transport subsidies. Students on the scheme SPED FAS also qualify for the School Meals Programme, which subsidises the cost of meals in school. We had revised the income eligibility criteria for the scheme in 2018 so that more low income families would benefit. Schools are also provided funds to exercise discretion and extend support to those who some reason do not meet the eligibility criteria for SPED FAS.
The Government will continue to work closely with the parent Volunteer Welfare Organisations (VWOs) running our SPED schools, to ensure that cost is not an impediment to access SPED schools.
asked the Minister for Health whether the Ministry will consider a campaign to guide our seniors on proper eyesight care and exercises that can prevent dizziness which is a common cause of falls.
: Seniors fall for a variety of factors, such as poor eyesight, decreased lower body strength and dizziness. MOH's efforts on fall prevention comprise both broad-based upstream prevention campaigns and outreach efforts as well as targeted interventions for those at higher risk of falls. Let me cite some examples.
The Health Promotion Board (HPB) has worked with community partners to raise awareness on falls prevention. HPB started a Falls Prevention Awareness Campaign in 2016 to provide seniors with tips to reduce the risk of falls. A guidebook was released containing information on fall prevention strategies such as wearing non-slip footwear and ensuring adequate calcium intake. The guidebooks were distributed through more than 300 touchpoints including Community Clubs and Centres, retail pharmacies, polyclinics and hospitals.
HPB also conducts regular health talks at Community Clubs and Centres, and Residents’ Committees, advising on falls prevention and on good eye care. Over 70,000 seniors have benefitted from these talks over the past two years. In addition, HPB conducts exercise programmes to encourage seniors to build up muscle strength and balance to minimise their risk of falls.
As part of their outreach efforts, Silver Generation Ambassadors (SGAs) conduct simple assessments of seniors’ health status during home visits. SGAs may refer seniors to relevant services such as HDB's Enhancement for Active Seniors (EASE) programme which subsidises home modifications such as anti-slip treatment for tiles and installation of grab bars to prevent falls at home. Seniors may also be linked up with service providers for care and support services.
Most recently, MOH worked with Temasek Foundation Cares to launch Project Silver Screen, a nationwide functional screening programme for seniors to check their vision, hearing and oral health. As part of the screening, seniors are advised on proper eye care, and those with abnormal vision results are referred to an optometrist or eye specialist if needed. Since January 2018, more than 40,000 seniors have benefitted from Project Silver Screen, and about one in three seniors were referred for follow-up care.
MOH and the healthcare family will continue to strengthen our efforts to reduce the risk of falls among our senior population.
asked the Minister for Health (a) in the past two years, what is the annual average number of times an elderly person above 60 years of age visits a polyclinic or CHAS clinic for outpatient or specialist treatment; (b) what is the basis for setting the MediSave withdrawal limit at $500 per year for outpatient treatment under the Chronic Disease Management Programme and $200 withdrawal limit per year under Flexi-MediSave for the elderly; and (c) whether a higher MediSave withdrawal limit can be set for outpatient treatment by elderly patients based on their MediSave savings.
: In the past two years, elderly patients above 60 years of age with chronic conditions visited polyclinics and Community Health Assist Scheme (CHAS) clinics an average of six times per year, with an average annual bill of about $200 after subsidies. Those without chronic illnesses visited these healthcare facilities an average of about three times a year, with an average annual bill of about $60 after subsidies.
MediSave withdrawal limits are reviewed regularly, taking into account other healthcare financing schemes, and seeking to strike the right balance between present consumption of MediSave and its use as savings for future use. The MediSave withdrawal limits are sized so that outpatient care remains affordable, after subsidies. Arising from our recent reviews, we increased the MediSave CDMP limit from $400 to $500, and lowered the minimum age for Flexi-MediSave to 60 in June 2018.
These limits are adequate for the majority of patients at polyclinics and CHAS clinics. Any appeals for higher withdrawals, including for elderly patients, can be considered on a case-by-case basis, especially where the bill size is high. For patients who require additional financial support, they can be referred to the Medical Social Workers to consider assistance from MediFund.
Any liberalisation of MediSave withdrawals, including having higher withdrawal limits based on MediSave balances, will have to be carefully considered as it may result in Singaporeans having less MediSave savings when they are retired and older, which is when they are most likely to have a need for their MediSave savings the most. MOH will continue to monitor the affordability of subsidised care, and regularly review the financing policies, including MediSave withdrawal limits.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) in the last three years, what is the number of fires that have been reported involving external industrial kitchen exhaust ducts installed in HDB commercial premises; (b) what measures are being taken by HDB to ensure that these ducts are serviced properly and regularly based on the nature of usage; and (c) what is the number of cases where HDB has taken action against property owners for failing to comply with the mandatory and proper maintenance of these external ducts in the last three years.
: From 2016 to 2018, there were a total of 10 fires that involved external kitchen exhaust ducts installed in HDB commercial premises.
Operators of food establishments are required to comply with NEA's Environmental Public Health (Food Hygiene) Regulations and SCDF's Fire Code, both of which include requirements for operators to clean and maintain the exhaust systems. NEA and SCDF carry out inspections and will take action against cases of non-compliance.
HDB issues annual advisories to all operators, advising them to carry out regular maintenance of their exhaust systems to comply with NEA and SCDF's requirements. Since October 2016, HDB has also required operators to submit their maintenance records at each tenancy renewal or transfer of property. Should operators fail to produce their maintenance records, HDB will withhold lease transfers and tenancy renewals. So far, operators have complied with this requirement, and HDB has not had to hold back the processing of any transfers or renewals.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) whether he can provide an update on the take-up rate for parking.sg since its implementation in October 2017; (b) what is the app utilisation rate versus use of coupons; (c) whether there are plans to allow for other payment platforms such as PayNow apart from credit card; and (d) whether there are plans to promote the app to more drivers.
: Since the app was launched on 1 October 2017, more than 550,000 unique vehicles and more than 60% of cars have used Parking.sg
1
. Motorists have initiated over 15 million parking sessions.
The number of parking coupons sold, at 50,000 booklets in December 2018, is less than one-third of the 180,000 booklets a month when the app was launched. At the same time, the number of parking sessions motorists initiated on Parking.sg has more than tripled, from 300,000 at launch to more than 1.1 million a month at present.
Drivers can pay for their parking sessions with their credit and debit cards. The team will continue to take in user feedback and improve the app. To raise the awareness of the app, government agencies have distributed flyers at locations frequented by motorists and advertised on social media.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources whether the Ministry will mandate developers, building owners and HDB to provide enclosed smoking rooms or pavilions in a precinct/HDB cluster, similar to what is provided in some airports and Japan, for smokers to smoke within the room and ensure that the smoke will not get into common areas affecting non-smokers.
: Smoking facilities such as smoking rooms and pavilions cannot completely eliminate the risks of exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke. Tobacco smoke contains pollutants that can seep out of these facilities.
Smoking facilities are also likely to become congregation points for smokers. As our housing estates are well-connected and densely built-up, it may be challenging to find appropriate locations for such facilities. Moreover, the daily sight of smokers gathering at smoking facilities could inadvertently give our youth the impression that it is normal to smoke. We want to avoid this, and therefore have no plans to mandate the provision of smoking facilities in residential precincts or housing clusters.
Our approach to protecting residents from second-hand smoke has been to progressively extend the smoking prohibition to as many public areas as possible. Within housing estates, these include places such as sheltered walkways, exercise areas, playgrounds, and common areas of residential buildings such as void decks and lift lobbies. The National Environment Agency will continue to monitor and enforce against smoking violations at these locations.
We urge smokers to abide by the smoking prohibition, and strive to give up the habit for the benefit of their own health, their loved ones, and the community.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources whether NEA can provide more assistance to hawker associations to eradicate the nuisance of pigeons and crows at hawker centres.
: Nuisance issues at hawker centres relating to pigeons and crows arise when birds are attracted to food remnants. To address this, government agencies such as the Agri-Food & Veterinary Authority (AVA) and National Environment Agency (NEA) work closely with hawkers, Hawker Associations, and Town Councils to implement preventive measures. These include public education and enforcement against pigeon feeding and littering, proper food waste management, and surveillance and bird management operations.
Other deterrent measures may also be implemented where required. These include the installation of bird spikes on building structures and beams to reduce perching opportunities, and nettings at the perimeter of hawker centres to prevent birds from entering. We will continue to work closely with stakeholders to manage bird nuisance issues. Hawker Associations which face difficulties with bird nuisance issues may approach NEA for support.
Patrons also play an important role in contributing to the cleanliness of hawker centres, thereby reducing bird nuisance. I encourage all patrons to return their crockery and trays to the tray return points when they finish dining.
asked the Minister for Trade and Industry (a) what are the demographics of the employees, including gender breakdown, in the energy and petrochemical sector; (b) what are the life-long learning opportunities in this sector; and (c) what is the Ministry doing to encourage more young Singaporeans to take an interest in this sector.
: The Energy & Chemicals (E&C) industry contributes about 3% of our Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and employs about 28,000 people in 2017, with the majority in their 30s and 40s, a PMET to non-PMET split of about 3:1, as well as a male to female split of about 2:1.
As our industries upgrade and transform, the Government is also making concerted efforts to help equip our workforce with the relevant skills to address the evolving needs of the industry. The Skills Framework for E&C was jointly developed by SkillsFuture Singapore (SSG), Workforce Singapore (WSG) and EDB, in collaboration with the industry, education and training institutions as well as unions. It provides key information about the sector, including career pathways, occupations and job roles, as well as existing and emerging skills required for our workforce to deepen their competencies. It also provides a corresponding list of training programmes for skills upgrading and mastery.
In addition, the Government is also investing in new training programmes by developing niche capabilities modules with our Institutes of Higher Learning (IHLs). For example, the advanced diploma in Specialty Chemicals launched by Singapore Polytechnic in 2017, complementing the other suite of programmes in ITE College East, Ngee Ann Polytechnic, Nanyang Polytechnic and Temasek Polytechnic.
To attract young talent to join the E&C industry, the Chemical Industry Manpower Advisory Committee (Chimac), co-chaired by the Economic Development Board (EDB) and Singapore Chemical Industry Council (SCIC), have been organising outreach programmes for schools, polytechnics and universities. One example is the "Chemical Experience Day" which exposes students to the working environment on Jurong Island and provides a glimpse into a day in the industry. On the Government’s part, four SkillsFuture Earn and Learn Programmes (ELP) have been launched for job roles such as process technicians and laboratory analysts. The ELP is a work-learn programme that provides polytechnic and ITE fresh graduates opportunities to build on the skills and knowledge that they have acquired in school. As of December 2018, 134 trainees have been placed in 23 E&C companies.
The growth of the E&C industry requires the collective effort of Government, industry and unions as well as our workers. We will continue to work with the various industry stakeholders to attract and equip our workers with the relevant skill sets to participate in the next phase of the E&C industry.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) over the past three years, what is the number of road accidents that have occurred at Newton Circus and its adjoining lanes; and (b) how can such road accidents be prevented with better road safety measures.
: Between 2016 and 2018, the Traffic Police recorded an average of nine accidents per year at Newton Circus and its adjoining lanes.
LTA is conducting works to further improve road safety in the area. These include new crossing facilities to ensure pedestrian safety, U-turn facilities at approaching roads to reduce the number of vehicles using the roundabout, and additional traffic signals so that vehicles entering the roundabout will have their own traffic phase.
LTA and the Traffic Police will continue to monitor the situation at Newton Circus. We urge all users to play their part by exercising caution and consideration when using our roads.
asked the Minister for Transport whether the Ministry will consider introducing regulations to facilitate hassle-free compensation by Singapore air operators to airline travellers for significant flight delays.
: When airlines encounter aircraft technical issues or face inclement weather, they would have to delay their flights to resolve the issues safely and comprehensively.
In Singapore, the interests of air passengers affected by flight delays are safeguarded under a national consumer protection framework. The responsibilities of airlines to their travelers in the event of flight delays are stated in their Conditions of Carriage. Consumers are advised to read and understand their rights and the airline's obligations before making any purchase.
If consumers feel that airlines have not fulfilled their responsibilities on service recovery and compensation, they can take up the matter with airlines. They can also seek assistance from the Consumers Association of Singapore (CASE) or lodge a claim with the Small Claims Tribunal. In Singapore's competitive air transport market, airlines have an interest to promptly and effectively respond to customers' needs and expectations on service quality.
The Ministry of Transport will continue to review the adequacy of consumer protection policies in the air transport market.
asked the Minister for Transport whether the Ministry will allow a second five-year extension of the Certificate of Entitlement if the vehicle is in good condition and has a track record of proper maintenance.
: For cars and motorcycles, the validity period for renewal COEs is aligned with new COEs, to ensure that owners of new and renewed vehicles pay the same COE for owning vehicles in the same category.
As an exception, LTA provides a five-year renewal option as a special concession to vehicle owners who would like to renew their COEs but feel that their vehicles may not last beyond another five years. This allows them to pay a smaller COE premium at the point of renewal. Vehicle owners are informed that the condition for the five-year renewal is that these vehicles must be deregistered at the end of five years, and no further renewals will be allowed. This is to prevent speculative activities where owners renew for shorter periods in the hope that COE prices will be lower in five years' time.
asked the Minister for Communications and Information (a) whether he can provide an update on the status of the digital TV (DTV) conversion till date including key learning points from this exercise; and (b) what are the challenges raised by households who have yet to switch to DTV and what kind of assistance will be available to these households.
: On 1 January 2019, we switched off analogue free-to-air signals, and transitioned fully to Digital TV or DTV. Today nine in ten Singaporean households can watch DTV, either over the air or through their Pay TV subscriptions. Based on outreach by the Info-communications Media Development Authority or IMDA, the remainder have not switched over primarily because they do not have TVs or they already have access to free-to-air TV through other means such as Toggle.
This was not an easy transition. We had to reach out to more than 540,000 households to migrate them to DTV, and work with Mediacorp to install a nation-wide DTV broadcasting network. The smooth migration was made possible by an intensive outreach campaign led by IMDA, which helped 416,000 households, or 77% of eligible households, to switch over to DTV through the DTV Starter Kit programme launched in April last year. I would also like to thank agencies, grassroots advisors and the more than 2,000 volunteers for helping us through this exercise.
Although we have crossed over fully to DTV, we recognise that there are some households which may not yet have switched over. IMDA has therefore extended the DTV Starter Kit application deadline to 31 March 2019 to help eligible households through this transition. IMDA will also continue advising other households how to switch to DTV, and work with Mediacorp to provide technical support to households.
asked the Minister for Defence for NSmen who have been injured during in-camp training, exercises or other Operationally Ready National Service (ORNS) duties (a) what is the length of time for which SAF will provide medical treatment or reimbursement for civilian medical treatment; and (b) how does SAF compensate injured NSmen for loss of earnings where medical treatment or medical leave is extended beyond the call-up days under their SAF100.
: For all NS men with service related injuries, MINDEF pays for all necessary medical expenses at government restructured hospitals, clinics and community hospitals for as long as required for the injured serviceman. This includes the costs of medical supplies and equipment, counselling and specialist care. MINDEF's framework for service injury is more comprehensive and generous than provisions specified under the Work Injury Compensation Act (WICA), which pays for up to one year of medical expenses from the date of the accident or capped at $36,000, whichever is reached earlier.
Further, MINDEF will also compensate injured NSmen for their loss of earnings as a result of any medical or hospitalisation leave, up to a period of two years from the last day of the call-up. Again this is more generous than the WICA where compensation for loss of earnings is up to a year from the date of the accident.
For training-related incidents, compensation for the injured serviceman is also more generous than amounts specified by the Work Injury Compensation Act for the same degree of permanent disability sustained, as MINDEF's compensation is doubled .
Finally, financial assistance is also provided for the families of selected injured servicemen through MINDEF's welfare schemes.
asked the Minister for Education (a) how many ITE graduates who took courses related to the energy and petrochemical sector found employment in this sector; (b) how accessible are internship opportunities for ITE students; (c) how are Government agencies working with ITE to help more Singaporeans obtain long-term employment in this sector; and (d) what is the status of the enrolment of courses run by the International Trading Institute of Singapore Management University.
: Based on the Graduate Employment Survey (GES), six in 10 graduates from courses related to the energy and petrochemical sector are in full-time permanent employment six months after graduation or six months to a year after completing national service. Amongst them, six in 10 are in jobs related to their course of study.  This is not surprising, as it is common for students to apply what they learnt at ITE to other sectors.
Having said that, ITE works with the industry and various Government agencies to help the graduates secure employment in the sector they are trained for. All ITE students in courses related to the energy and petrochemical sector are required to undergo internship. ITE also reviews the curriculum of its courses regularly to ensure their industry relevance and currency of the skills taught.
For example, ITE's Nitec in Chemical Process Technology is jointly developed with the Economic Development Board (EDB) and its industry partners.
The International Trading Institute (ITI) at the Singapore Management University (SMU) runs courses in the International Trading track and Maritime Business Operations track. These are offered through SMU's Lee Kong Chian School of Business. More than 740 students have enrolled in these courses since they were first launched in 2006.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs (a) in the past three years, how many inmates who are released from prison have homes to return to; (b) what solutions are there for those who do not have a place to stay; and (c) whether the Ministry works with the Singapore Prison Service to coordinate interim housing for former inmates.
: The vast majority of inmates who are released from prison have homes to return to.
For inmates who do not have a place to stay after their release, the Family Resource Centre at the Singapore Prison Service will refer them to interim housing options, such as halfway houses and shelter homes. In the past three years, around 850 such referrals were made. This represents about 3% of the total number of inmates released.
asked the Minister for National Development in respect of HDB's Lease Buyback Scheme (a) whether the flat owner is required to use the proceeds to return the CPF amount used to purchase the flat before the net proceeds are used to top up the owner's CPF Retirement Account; and (b) whether HDB will consider allowing flat owners in need to receive half of the proceeds from the Lease Buyback Scheme in cash.
: There is no need for seniors who take up the Lease Buyback Scheme (LBS) to refund the CPF monies they had used to purchase the flat. Instead, the LBS proceeds are first used to meet a basic level of CPF Retirement Account savings. Any remaining amount can then be taken out in cash. This ensures that seniors are able to benefit from a lifelong income stream under CPF LIFE.
Most seniors who take up the LBS are able to meet this CPF top-up requirement and still receive some of their LBS proceeds in cash. On top of this, they also receive the LBS bonus in cash.
HDB conducts personalised face-to-face counselling sessions for seniors who are interested in the LBS or other housing monetisation options. Seniors are encouraged to make an appointment with their HDB Branch to find out more, so that they can make an informed decision about which option is best for their specific needs and circumstances.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) whether there are plans to encourage the take-up of third-party liability insurance among PMD users; and (b) whether the Ministry has engaged with the insurance industry to explore this.
: The Land Transport Authority (LTA) has been actively promoting the take-up of third-party liability insurance. First, LTA and the Active Mobility Advisory Panel have engaged the insurance industry and posted information on the types of third party liability insurance products available in the market today on LTA's website www.onemotoring.com.sg/escooter.
Second, LTA has reached out to e-scooter owners who have registered their devices under the registration regime which commenced on 2 January 2019 to encourage them to purchase third-party liability insurance. LTA has also engaged employers of large groups of active mobility users such as food delivery companies to encourage them to provide insurance coverage.
We are currently in the midst of the first license application cycle for motorised personal mobility device (PMD)-sharing services. Operators that are awarded licences to operate will be required to procure and maintain third-party liability insurance.
asked the Minister for Transport (a) whether the Ministry has carried out studies to determine the extent of the increase of all types of vehicular traffic arising from e-commerce and food deliveries in the past three years and its implications on our roads, road usage and the Government's plans; (b) if yes, whether the Government can share its findings with the public; and (c) if no, whether the Government will consider doing such a study.
: LTA monitors vehicular traffic on our roads on an on-going basis. Over the past few years, congestion levels have remained stable.
LTA does not track vehicular traffic arising specifically from e-commerce and food deliveries. We have no plans to require such data from businesses so as not to impose additional regulatory burden on them.
asked the Minister for Transport for 2018, what is the Mean Kilometres Between Failure (MKBF) for (i) the North-South Line (ii) the East-West Line (iii) the Circle Line (iv) North-East Line and (v) the Downtown Line respectively.
: The Mean Kilometres Between Failure (MKBF) for the MRT network increased from 181,000 train-km in 2017 to 690,000 train-km in 2018. The 2018 MKBF performance for each of the rail lines is in the Table below.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs (a) what is the number of bicycle thefts in the last three years; (b) to date, how many bicycle owners have signed up to join the Bicycle Security Label initiative that was implemented in 2011 to tackle bicycle thefts; and (c) whether the Bicycle Security Label is still issued by the police as part of its theft prevention initiative and, if not, why has it been discontinued.
: The number of reported bicycle thefts has been on a downward trend in the past three years. In 2018, there were 522 cases, compared to 979 in 2016, and around 1,100-1,200 each year between 2011-2015.
The Bicycle Security Label scheme was started in 2011. About 150,000 labels were issued, before the scheme was discontinued in 2017.
Police found that the scheme had limited effectiveness in tackling bicycle thefts. For one thing, it was not difficult to tamper with the labels. There are more effective ways to solve bicycle theft cases, such as through the use of CCTV footages to identify the culprits.
Police have channelled resources to raise public awareness on preventing bicycle thefts, especially on the use of secure bicycle locks. Police have also worked with LTA and shopping malls to install CCTVs covering designated bicycle parking areas. The expansion of PolCam has also helped to deter and solve theft cases. With these efforts, the number of bicycle theft cases has fallen significantly, by over 57% since 2015.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs over the past five years, how many drivers between the age of 18 and 21 as well as probationary drivers have been arrested for the offence of drink driving.
: Between 2014 and 2018, on average, about 17 motorists between the ages of 18 and 21 were arrested for drink-driving annually. The corresponding figure for motorists with probationary licences was about 111. The table below provides the detailed statistics.
asked the Minister for Home Affairs (a) in 2017 and 2018, how many complaints have been received about speeding vehicles at Upper Bukit Timah Road particularly at night along the stretch outside Springdale and Southaven (I & II) condominiums; (b) how many accidents have occurred at this stretch of the road; (c) what enforcement action or preventive effort has been made to reduce speeding at this stretch of the road; and (d) whether speed cameras will be installed to reduce the instances of driving above the speed limit.
: Between 2017 and 2018, there were 14 calls and letters from members of the public to Traffic Police ("TP") on speeding vehicles along Upper Bukit Timah Road, of which eight cases took place at night. In all 14 cases, the stretch of road outside the two condominiums was not cited.
There were, however, 15 road traffic accidents on this stretch of road during the same period. Speeding was likely to have been the cause for only one of the accidents. Eight of the accidents involved vehicles that had been making right turns or U-turns.
To help motorists make right turns and U-turns more safely, LTA will install red-amber-green arrow lights at some traffic junctions along Upper Bukit Timah Road, including the stretch of road outside the two condominiums, by the end of this year.
To deter speeding and other offences, TP will continue to conduct regular enforcement operations in the area. Prominent signage has been installed outside Springdale Condominium, to remind motorists of the speed limit. TP will also consider installing speed cameras in the area if found necessary.
asked the Minister for Health what are the top three reasons for the continuing increase in MediFund utilisation apart from an ageing population.
: MediFund utilisation has increased over the last decade, to $150 million in FY17. The increase was higher in the earlier years. Since FY16, the figure has been more stable, following the introduction of MediShield Life and Pioneer Generation package, both of which extended more healthcare financing support.
There are a few reasons for the increase in MediFund utilisation over the past decade:
First, we have been helping more Singaporeans, as we expanded our public healthcare capacity to serve more patients. Over the last decade, the number of MediFund applications increased by close to 10% annually, on average.
Second, we have expanded the scope of coverage of MediFund to cover more services and conditions. For example, MediFund was extended to cover non-residential intermediate and long term care services in 2012, and to polyclinics, dental services, antenatal and delivery services in 2013.
Third, we have been providing greater support to those with greater healthcare needs. For example, we have enhanced the scheme through the introduction of MediFund Silver in 2007 and MediFund Junior in 2013 to better target support for young and elderly Singaporeans respectively.
We will continue to monitor the MediFund utilisation to ensure that it is sustainable and no Singaporean is denied appropriate healthcare due to an inability to pay.
asked the Minister for Health in light of more skin cancer patients under the age of 50 (a) what is being done to protect soldiers and students exposed to long hours under the sun; and (b) whether there are studies done to monitor these groups of persons as they advance to their 30s and 40s and who may fall victim to skin cancer because of their exposure to ultraviolet light.
: Skin cancer was the 9th most common cancer among Singaporeans from 2013-2017. 10% of cases were below 50 years old, although the incidence of new cases in this group increased from 1.2 to 2.7 per 100,000 persons from 1983-1987 to 2013-2017 respectively.
Studies have linked cumulative exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light with an increased risk of skin cancer. However, exposure to sunlight has health benefits as it is important for Vitamin D formation and hence for healthy bone formation. Sufficient time outdoors can also help prevent or delay myopia in children.
Singapore Armed Forces soldiers are provided with Personal Protective Equipment, such as head gear and long-sleeved combat uniform, that protects them from sun exposure. Physical training conducted in sports attire and swimming kit are typically conducted in the early mornings or late afternoons when sunlight is less intense.
Likewise, in Ministry of Education schools, outdoors activities are generally conducted in the early mornings and late afternoons to minimise students' exposure to UV light. Frequent rest and water breaks under shade are incorporated into activities carried out during other parts of the day. Students are also taught to use sunscreen, broad-brimmed hats and caps, long sleeved shirts, and sunglasses to protect themselves against excessive UV exposure.
There are no known local studies regarding skin cancer among young persons as the incidence of skin cancer remains low in this group. Nevertheless, it is prudent that Singaporeans take measures to protect themselves from prolonged exposure to UV light and see a doctor early if they develop symptoms.
asked the Minister for Health whether the teeth whitening products sold online are safe for use and whether there are any regulations governing the online sale of these products.
: Teeth whitening products are regulated as cosmetic products under the Health Products (Cosmetic Products – ASEAN Cosmetic Directive) Regulations. They usually contain hydrogen peroxide, a bleaching agent, which may pose a risk of damage to the teeth and gums if used inappropriately.
To safeguard the public, only those preparations containing 0.1% of hydrogen peroxide or less are allowed to be sold directly to consumers. Those containing more than 0.1% can only be supplied or used by registered dentists.
The Health Sciences Authority (HSA) monitors the safety of health products, including cosmetics, sold in the local market. HSA conducts regular checks on the products, including those sold online. Sellers of unsafe products will be ordered to remove such products from the market. When online sale of unsafe cosmetic products are detected, HSA will work with the administrators of online platforms to remove the listings of the affected products. Any person found to contravene the regulation is liable to a fine up to $50,000 or imprisonment up to two years, or both.
Given the widespread reach of the internet, consumers play an important part in safeguarding their own health. They should be careful not to purchase these products from unknown vendors and should obtain them from a reliable supplier. For those products containing >0.1% hydrogen peroxide, they should obtain them from a dentist.
asked the Minister for Health (a) in the past three years, what is the number of cases of home-based salons providing dental services such as dental veneers and teeth whitening; (b) what actions have been taken against these offenders; and (c) whether there are any plans to educate the public against going to such home-based salons for dental services.
: The provision of dental services, such as veneers and teeth whitening services is a practice of dentistry. Under the Dental Registration Act, only a registered dentist is allowed to practice dentistry in Singapore. The practice must be conducted in a premise licensed under the Private Hospitals and Medical Clinics Act.
In the past three years, there were five reported cases on home-based dental services. Investigations into these cases are on-going.
The Ministry takes a serious view of the practice of dentistry being performed by non-dentists in unlicensed premises and will not hesitate to take tough enforcement action against any person who contravenes the law. It is unlawful for any person not registered with the Singapore Dental Council to provide dental services. If found guilty, the person shall be liable to a fine not exceeding $25,000. Repeat offenders can be fined up to $50,000 or to an imprisonment for up to six months or to both. Additionally, any person found operating an unlicensed premise shall be liable to a fine not exceeding $20,000 or to a jail term not more than two years or to both.
The Ministry advises the public to be cautious about using healthcare services from unfamiliar sources. When in doubt, they should seek advice from their regular doctor or dentist or can check the list of licensed healthcare institutions and registered healthcare professionals on MOH's and relevant professional board's websites. The Ministry will step up our efforts on consumer education regarding unlawful dental services.
asked the Minister for Health in each year of the past five years, what has been the usage rate of Automatic External Defibrilators (AEDs) installed in public places.
: Automatic External Defibrillators (AEDs) are used to restart the heart when persons collapse due to cardiac arrest. AED use is associated with increased survival in Out-of-Hospital Cardiac Arrest (OHCA) patients. The latest available data is up to 2017, and indicates that AED usage rate has increased from 1.9% in 2012 to 6.4% in 2017
1
. This increase is likely due to a growing public awareness about the use of AEDs as well as the availability of AEDs in public places.
asked the Minister for Culture, Community and Youth (a) whether there will be a renewal of the Active SG credits once these have been completely utilised; and (b) if so, whether there will be changes in the terms and conditions of use.
:  In conjunction with the launch of ActiveSG in April 2014, Sport Singapore introduced a one-off $100 credit to ActiveSG members upon joining. The purpose is to encourage Singaporeans to kick-start an active lifestyle.  Currently, we have no plans to renew the credits for members who have utilised them fully, but we are regularly looking for ways to encourage Singaporeans to adopt a more active lifestyle.
asked the Minister for Trade and Industry (a) how will Singapore be impacted by a no-deal Brexit; and (b) how will Brexit affect the rectification and implementation of the EU-Singapore Free Trade Agreement.
: The UK is the second largest economy in the EU and the fifth largest globally. It is also an important economic partner of Singapore. Like other countries, we are keeping a close watch on Brexit, which remains set for 29 March 2019.
There are three possible scenarios. First, the UK and the EU agreeing on a Withdrawal Agreement. Second, the UK exits the EU without any deal, that is, "Hard Brexit". Third, a scenario in which the UK's formal departure from the EU is postponed beyond 29 March 2019.
Under the first scenario, the Withdrawal Agreement will include an "Implementation Period" that will last till 31 December 2020. This scenario offers the greatest predictability and stability while minimising disruption to businesses. This is because during the Implementation Period, the UK will continue to be functionally treated as an EU Member State, and remain a party to EU international agreements – including the EU-Singapore Free Trade Agreement (EUSFTA) when it is ratified by the European Parliament as targeted in 2019.
Under the second no-deal scenario, the UK will cease to be a party to the EU's agreements with third countries when it formally leaves the EU on 29 March 2019. This would mean that the EUSFTA will not apply between the UK and Singapore even after its entry into force. This in itself would not impact our trading relationship with the UK as the current tariff and non-tariff regime for Singapore companies trading with the UK are based on WTO terms which would continue to apply.
Under the third scenario, the UK's formal departure from the EU will be postponed to a date after 29 March 2019. This would entail the UK extending the Article 50 timeline, subject to the unanimous approval of all EU Member States. The prospect of an imminent no-deal Brexit would be diminished, although we may see a period of continued uncertainty.
Singapore and the UK share substantial trade and investment linkages, with many of our businesses operating in each other's markets across sectors such as pharmaceuticals, professional services and consumer goods. MTI's assessment is that trade between the UK and Singapore will not be fundamentally impaired. Nonetheless, owing to the integrated nature of today's global supply chains as well as the extensive trade linkages that spans the UK, EU, and the rest of the world, a no-deal Brexit could weigh on consumer and business sentiments in the UK and EU, with potential negative effects on global growth.
MTI and Enterprise Singapore will continue working closely with Singapore companies to help with any near term company-specific disruption. This will include facilitating link-ups between companies and the appropriate authorities to work through continuity issues in areas such as labour and talent supply, or delays in shipments that might be routed between the UK and the EU.
MTI is also in close contact with UK economic agencies on measures to strengthen our strong trade and investment relations. We have several bilateral platforms with the UK, such as the UK-Singapore Economic and Business Partnership (EBP) and the recently launched UK-Singapore Partnership for the Future (P4F). Singapore is also prepared to work with the UK to apply the EUSFTA in a UK-Singapore context that could form the basis of a future Singapore-UK trade agreement.
The ratification of the EUSFTA and EU-Singapore Investment Protection Agreement (EUSIPA) is on track. The ratification process is not affected by Brexit, and both agreements are expected to be voted on by the European Parliament during its next sitting from 11 to 14 February 2019. Pending clarity on post-Brexit arrangements, any consequential amendments to the EUSFTA can be addressed during the implementation phase.
asked the Minister for National Development (a) whether the unusual divergence in price trends for private homes and HDB resale flats in 2018 is caused by concerns regarding leasehold decay and depreciation of ageing HDB flats; and (b) whether the divergence is a cause for concern if it is not arrested.
: The URA's Property Price Index (PPI) captures all private housing transactions, including new sales (units sold by developers), resales and sub-sales; the HDB's Resale Price Index (RPI) captures all HDB resale flat transactions.
Insofar as there are underlying factors that affect both the public and private property markets, the two indices would tend to move together. But there have been instances of divergence in the PPI and RPI price trends. This has happened in the past, and more recently between 2Q2017 and 3Q2018. The recent divergence was largely due to euphoric sentiments in the private property market. This resulted in a sharp increase in private property prices over a very short duration. This was not sustainable as prices were increasing well ahead of fundamentals. Hence the government had moved to introduce the last round of cooling measures in July last year.
The Government will continue to monitor both the public and private property markets, and ensure they are stable and sustainable.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources in light of incidents of food poisoning and hygiene issues at food premises, whether there will be any added surveillance and action to be taken for less permanent establishments such as pop-up food stalls, fun fair stalls selling food, night market food stalls and bazaar food stalls.
: The National Environment Agency maintains a strict regime to ensure food safety in temporary food stalls, e.g. pop-up food stalls, fun fair stalls selling food, night market food stalls and bazaar food stalls. First, proper washing facilities, storage with temperature control and covered display showcases for food items must be provided at temporary fair food stalls. Second, NEA restricts extensive food preparation, such as degutting of fish and cutting of raw meat or vegetables in temporary stalls. The sale of high-risk food items such as ready-to-eat raw seafood is also restricted Third, food handlers working in such stalls must be registered with NEA and pass the mandatory Basic Food Hygiene Course. NEA will take firm enforcement action against anyone who violates the regulations. Offenders may face licence suspension and/or a maximum penalty of up to $10,000 for the first offence.
To uphold the food hygiene standards, NEA conducts unannounced inspections at the temporary food stalls. Where NEA assesses any potential risks, NEA will step up inspections as well as conduct joint operations with other agencies to curb illegal food handlers at the temporary food stalls.
NEA will continue to monitor the situation closely and step up inspections, if need be, to safeguard the environment and ensure public health.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources in light of increasing food waste in Singapore (a) how can we engage community and partners through enhancing internal processes, public education, and partnerships to reduce food wastage; and (b) what more can be done specifically in homes, schools, workplaces and food and beverage establishments where food waste is most common.
: In 2017, about 810,000 tonnes of food waste was generated. Food waste is one of our largest waste streams and has a relatively low recycling rate. It remains one of our priority waste streams this year, the Year Towards Zero Waste, together with e-waste and packaging waste. My Ministry takes a multi-pronged approach to addressing food waste, which includes encouraging food waste reduction, food redistribution, and recycling.
Since 2015, NEA has been running a food waste reduction campaign that includes media publicity to raise awareness, and outreach programmes on ways to reduce food wastage in households. Educational materials such as the Food Waste Handy Guide, which has tips to help consumers reduce food waste, are made available online and at community road shows.
NEA started the "Love Your Food @ Schools" programme in April 2017, which encourages schools to minimise food waste.
To help the food and beverage industry reduce food wastage, NEA and the Agri-Food and Veterinary Authority (AVA) launched food waste minimisation guidebooks for food retail establishments, supermarkets, and food manufacturing establishments to provide guidance on reducing food waste across the supply chain. Guidelines on the proper handling and redistribution of unsold or excess food are also incorporated to facilitate food redistribution.
To promote food waste recycling, NEA supports companies through its 3R Fund, to implement projects such as the installation of on-site food waste treatment systems. NEA has so far co-funded 21 on-site food waste treatment systems. We also conducted a "Food Waste, Don't Waste!" pilot at Tampines Greenlace HDB estate, where residents segregated their food waste and disposed of it in dedicated food waste bins on the ground floor. The food waste was then recycled at Our Tampines Hub to produce fertiliser and non-potable water.
This multi-pronged approach has begun to yield results. Food waste recycling has increased from 13% in 2015 to 16% in 2017. Nonetheless, there is much more we can do.
As part of our Year Towards Zero Waste efforts, my Ministry will continue to explore measures to better manage food waste in homes, schools, workplaces, and food and beverage establishments. These measures will also be part of our inaugural Zero Waste Masterplan to be launched this year. However, the Government cannot do this alone. This is why we have set aside $2 million this year to fund ground-up projects related to Zero Waste. We will also consult the public and engage non-governmental organisations (NGOs) to seek their views and ideas and co-create initiatives to better manage food waste.
asked the Minister for the Environment and Water Resources in the past five years, what proportion of food safety and hygiene checks performed on food service operators and caterers have been unannounced checks.
: The National Environment Agency (NEA) currently licenses more than 39,000 retail food establishments, including food outlets such as restaurants and caterers, to ensure that the food sold is prepared hygienically and safe for consumption.
All inspections of retail food establishments conducted by NEA are unannounced. In the past five years, NEA has conducted more than 606,000 inspections in total.
NEA will take strict enforcement action against retail food establishments that do not adopt proper food hygiene practices, as well as for any food hygiene lapses found. NEA will continue to monitor the situation closely and step up inspections, if need be, to safeguard food safety and public health.
asked the Minister for Education for each year in the past five years, what is the number of students entering the (i) Normal (Technical) (ii) Normal (Academic) and (ii) Express streams respectively.
: Over the last five years, about 5,000 students enter the Normal (Technical) course, 10,000 students enter the Normal (Academic) course and 25,500 students enter the Express course each year. The proportion of students entering each course varies slightly each year depending on student performance at the PSLE as well as choice of course made by the students who are eligible for both courses, for example, Express/Normal (Academic).
asked the Minister for Education (a) in 2018, what is the total number of students in schools and institutes of higher learning who sought help with counsellors due to stress and anxiety; and (b) what is the current student-counsellor ratio in each school.
: Counselling issues vary in causes and complexity, and schools and Institutes of Higher Learning (IHLs) have varying ways of tracking them. We estimate that in 2018, around 10 out of every 1,000 students at schools and IHLs received counselling support for anxiety or stress-related issues. These issues include relationship, personal struggles, family disputes, or academic difficulties. We do not have macro level specific breakdown for anxiety or stress-related counselling issues.
Today, all schools are resourced with at least one to two school counsellors, while all IHLs are resourced with at least two to three counsellors. They are in turn augmented by part-time MOE-trained school counsellors, para-counsellors, Flexi-Adjunct School Counsellors, or Teacher Counsellors.
MOE is looking into upstream work such as training of teachers in mental health literacy and preventive programmes for vulnerable/at-risk students. All teachers are already equipped with basic counselling skills and serve as front-liners in supporting students with social-emotional needs. Mental health is an issue to be taken seriously, and requires the concerted efforts of educators, counsellors, parents and peers.
asked the Minister for Education what is the breakdown of the number of local and foreign academics, PhD students, non-faculty research staff and non-faculty teaching staff in our autonomous universities by age group, academic discipline and academic rank/position respectively.
: The breakdown of staff in the Autonomous Universities (AUs) – by academics, non-faculty research staff and non-faculty teaching staff (that is, adjunct lecturers or associate lecturers), and the proportion of Singaporean Citizens (SCs) in each category is in Table 1,
PhD students are not AU staff and take on a range of jobs outside the university after graduation.
For academics and non-faculty teaching staff, the median ages are around 50.
The SC proportions among those who were below 50 years old, and those 50 years and above, are in Table 2.
It is not meaningful to compare the SC proportion by age band for researchers, as the overwhelming majority of them are below age 50.
SC academics accounted for 50% in Science, Technology, Engineering and Medicine (STEM) disciplines and 48% in Social Sciences and Humanities (SSH) disciplines. The proportion of SCs in SSH disciplines was higher than that of STEM for non-faculty researchers and non-faculty teaching staff. The details are in Table 3.
Of the academics who were holding senior positions of Associate Professors and above, SCs made up 50%.
asked the Minister for Manpower whether the CPF Board can allow withdrawals after an account holder reaches 55 years of age for their payment of annual premiums of endowment policies which will go back to CPF upon maturity.
: Endowment policies with regular premium payments were available for sale under the CPF Investment Scheme (CPFIS) before 2001. CPF members age 55 and above who had purchased such policies can continue to pay for their premiums using their savings in the Ordinary Account after setting aside their cohort Full Retirement Sum, or Basic Retirement Sum if they have a sufficient property charge or pledge.
For members who have not set aside the required Retirement Sum, CPF Board will consider allowing them to use their CPF savings to pay the endowment policy premiums on a case by case basis.
asked the Minister for Manpower as of January 2019 (a) what is the number of members who have reached their CPF Withdrawal Limit for their properties and are using other means to service their housing mortgages; (b) what is the number of CPF members who appealed to use their Special and/or Retirement Accounts to help service their properties and of this number, how many have been given approval to do so.
: (a) Number of CPF members who have reached their withdrawal limits
Currently, about 740,000 property owners use their CPF savings to service their housing instalments. Of these, about 6,000 (0.8%) property owners have reached their withdrawal limits for housing and are using other means to finance their mortgage. They include members who have reached the Valuation Limit (VL) but cannot use more of their CPF savings for housing as they do not have at least the Basic Retirement Sum (BRS), or members who took bank loans and have reached the Withdrawal Limit (WL) cap set at 120% VL.
(b) Number of CPF members who appeal to use Special and/or Retirement Account savings
The Special Account (SA) and Retirement Account (RA) savings are safeguarded for members' retirement needs, and generally cannot be used for housing purposes.
That said, CPF Board exercised flexibility in some cases. For example, CPF Board has allowed CPF members to use their RA savings that originated from their Ordinary Account (OA) to pay for their housing on appeal, even if their RA savings are below the BRS. In 2018, CPF Board granted about 8,000 appeals to use their RA savings for housing. The Board took into account the member's retirement adequacy and outstanding loan amount in deciding whether an exception could be made.
asked the Minister for Manpower (a) whether the Ministry has studied allowing greater flexibility for eligible CPF members in choosing monthly payout amounts, such as deferring a portion of their monthly payout, to allow members to tailor CPF payouts to their changing incomes and expenditures as they age; (b) if so, what are the results of such studies; and (c) what are the policy considerations involved in allowing such greater flexibility.
: We recognise that CPF members have varying needs in retirement. This is why we have provided members with a number of options to have flexibility in their CPF retirement payouts.
At age 55, CPF members are required to set aside savings up to their cohort Full Retirement Sum (FRS) in the Retirement Account (RA). Members with sufficient property charge or pledge can also choose to set aside the Basic Retirement Sum (BRS) instead. Members will then receive a steady stream of monthly payouts in retirement depending on the amount they have in their RAs.
Members can consider the following options if they wish to receive higher payouts:
(a) Set aside a higher amount in their RA, up to the prevailing Enhanced Retirement Sum (ERS). This can be done by topping up their RA in cash, or transferring CPF savings from their own Ordinary or Special Accounts or from their family member's CPF accounts to their RA.
(b) Start payouts later. Deferring the start of payouts will increase their payout quantum, duration or both.
Members can also choose the CPF LIFE Escalating Plan that provides lower payouts at first and subsequently higher payouts that increase at 2% every year.
Beyond these options, members can also further adjust their payouts through CPF transfers and cash top-ups, even after they have started their payouts.
Overall, we have to carefully balance providing members with flexibility to meet their diverse needs with the need to keep the CPF system adequate and simple.
CPF members can approach CPF Board to better understand how the different payout options can meet their needs.
asked the Minister for Social and Family Development whether the Ministry will consider increasing the manpower in social service offices as they take on the enhanced role of coordinating with all the community organisations to provide holistic help to families and individuals in distress.
: The Ministry of Social and Family Development's (MSF) Social Service Offices (SSOs) carry out two main functions. First, the SSOs deliver financial assistance to low-income individuals and families, and link them up to various agencies for their other needs, such as housing, employment and family services. The objective is to ensure that these individuals or families receive comprehensive help. For example, where there are families with complex needs that require interfaces with multiple agencies, SSOs can step in to facilitate discussions or convene case conferences where needed. Second, the SSOs do ground sensing and local services planning, working closely with community partners to coordinate the planning and delivery of social services in the community.
The demands on our SSOs are growing. Over the years, the number of ComCare applications has increased, in large part because of increased awareness of available help schemes with the rollout of the network of 24 SSOs. Our SSOs are located within HDB towns, so that those in need can access help easily. The number of complex cases requiring coordination by the SSOs has also grown.
To respond to these challenges amid tighter manpower constraints, MSF is taking a multi-pronged approach. First, we are leveraging technology like video-conferencing to enhance productivity and efficiency at the SSOs. Second, we are strengthening backend inter-agency coordination, supported by enhanced protocols, data-sharing, and town-level SG Community Networks sessions. Third, we are using data analytics to inform resource planning and optimise deployment across our SSOs. These strategies ensure that our SSOs work efficiently yet effectively to serve vulnerable individuals and families.
MSF periodically reviews the SSOs' manpower needs, and will continue to monitor our operations, and adjust the level of required resourcing accordingly. Even as the SSOs step up to pull together efforts to help vulnerable families, we also appreciate the active contributions by the community and every Singaporean to this collective effort of giving those in need a leg up to regain stability, and building a caring society.
asked the Minister for Social and Family Development (a) whether working mothers who have been receiving childcare subsidies can continue to receive the same level of subsidies for up to three months without being subjected to a case-by-case review when they become unemployed and are looking for a new job in the interim; and (b) under what circumstances do current case-by-case reviews reject such appeals.
: Working mothers who become unemployed may need some time to look for a new job. The Early Childhood Development Agency (ECDA) supports these mothers by providing the same level of child care subsidies for three months after their employment had ended
This extension of subsidies is intended to support these mothers and give them peace of mind as they look for employment, knowing that their children continue to be cared for in preschool.
We will continue to review these policies and processes, as providing affordable and quality preschool services for parents is a key priority for the Government.
asked the Minister for Social and Family Development (a) what is the total number of social enterprises (SEs) last year; (b) how many of these SEs are registering revenues of more than $150,000; (c) how many SEs are more than three years old; and (d) what has been the impact of SEs on the social sector in the same period.
: The Singapore Centre for Social Enterprise, or raiSE, is the membership body and sector developer for social enterprises (SEs) in Singapore. Funded by MSF, Tote Board and the National Council of Social Service (NCSS), raiSE had a membership of 336 SE members as at 31 March 2018. Of these, 92 (27%) had an annual revenue of at least or more than $200,000
1
.148 members (44%) were registered or incorporated in 2015 or earlier. SEs are not required to register with raiSE, and not all SEs are members of raiSE.
SEs aim to provide business solutions to address social needs and gaps, creating social impact in sustainable ways. In this way, SEs bridge the gap between conventional charities and for-profit companies. SEs create social impact in many ways, such as through developing innovative solutions to emerging social needs and providing consultancy services to the social service sector. One significant area of impact is in the provision of employment opportunities for disadvantaged and needy beneficiaries. In Financial Year 2017, 869 such beneficiaries were employed by 120 raiSE members.
